http://religion.b1ogs.cnn.com/20 1 2/09/13/my-take-a-deadlv-link-between-islamic-and-anti-islam c-extremists/
Editor's Note: Stephen Prothero, a Boston University religion scholar and author of "The American Bible:
How Our Words Unite, Divide, and Define a Nation," is a regular CNN Belief Blog contributor.
By Stephen Prothero, Special to CNN
What should we make of the attacks on the U.S. consulates in Egypt, Libya and Yemen, and the deaths of
four Americans, including U.S. ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens?
It depends on who you mean by "we."
From the perspective of those who stormed the embassies, taking down the American flag in Egypt and
replacing it with a black flag reading, "There is no God but Allah and Mohammed is his messenger," theirs was
an act of justice on behalf of the One True Faith.
The Americans had it coming, according to this view, because Americans are on the wrong side in the clash of
civilizations between the Judeo-Christian West and the Muslim world. And the creation of an anti-Islamic video
(ironically entitled "Innocence of Muslims") by a producer thought to be an American provided the catalyst
(or excuse) for the protests.
Why Muslims are sensitive about portraying the Prophet Mohammed
Most Americans operate by a different "we." From our perspective, the assault was an unjust and cowardly
attack on (among other things) the rule of law, the institution of diplomacy and the right of free speech.
Libyan Deputy Prime Minister Mustafa Abushagur gave voice to this perspective when he said on Twitter, "I
condemn these barbaric attacks in the strongest possible terms. This is an attack on America, Libya and free
people everywhere."
"Some have sought to justify this vicious behavior as a response to inflammatory material posted on the
Internet," Secretary of State Hillary Clinton added. "The United States deplores any intentional effort to
denigrate the religious beliefs of others. Our commitment to religious tolerance goes back to the very beginning
of our nation."
In a commencement speech at Kenyon College in 2005, later published as"This Is Water," novelist David
Foster Wallace urged student to scrutinize the "natural, basic self-centeredness" that puts "me" at the center of
the world.
This unconscious "default setting" fosters the sort of "blind certainty" that manifests as arrogant atheism and
fundamentalism alike, Wallace said. And the point of education is to shake us out of that "default setting" — to
begin to see things from the perspectives of others.
Follow the CNN Belief Blog on Twitter
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045293
B6
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Wallace focused in his speech on the individual "I." But his critique can be applied as well to another "default
setting" (this one more cultural than natural): our tendency to understand the world from the perspective of
Give:5
According to those who stormed the embassies, "Innocence of Muslims" was not made by an individual
(whoever the shadowy "Sam Bacile" may — or may not — be). It was made by anAmerican.
Moreover, according to this groupthink, Americans as a group are responsible for the sins of individual
Americans, so it makes perfect sense to strike out at embassy personnel who issued a statement before the
protests turned deadly, condemning "the continuing efforts by misguided individuals to hurt the religious
feelings of Muslims, as we condemn efforts to offend believers of all religions."
CNN's Belief Blog: The faith angles behind the biggest stories
Meanwhile, the shadowy figures who produced and distributed "Innocence of Muslims" are imprisoned in some
groupthink of their own, which gathers all the world's Muslims under the category of an evil Islamic empire.
Their film doesn't just depict Mohammed as a con man, philanderer, and pedophile. It portrays his followers as
dupes.
Unfortunately, the events of recent days have done nothing to jar the alleged producer out of this default setting.
When questioned about his film in the aftermath of the Libyan and Egyptian attacks, a man identifying himself
as "Sam Bacile" reportedly told the Wall Street Journal that "Islam is a cancer."
You don't need a Kenyon college degree to see how this vicious cycle of provocation and violence is fueled,
and you don't need to be a moral relativist to see that it takes two sides to keep it running.
I am an American who is justly proud of the First Amendment and its protections of freedom of speech and
religion. And I believe that killing your opponents in the name of God or nation is a far greater offense than
offending them with an ignorant movie.
Nonetheless, the root problem on display here is in my view what Wallace denounced as "blind certainty."
Our world is not divided first and foremost along religious or national lines, into Muslims and Christians and
Hindus or Israelis and Americans and Egyptians.
Neither is it divided into secularists and people of faith — the New Atheists and partisans of old-time religion.
The real "red line" in the modem world divides the certain from the uncertain. And in the tragic events of recent
days, those who produced and distributed this hateful movie stand on the same side of this line as the killers of
innocents in Libya and Egypt.
Both groups are possessed by the unholy spirit of "blind certainty," unacquainted with both the complexity and
contradictions of life on Earth and the "cloud of unknowing" that hovers over every major religion.
The great religious thinkers in Judaism, Christianity and Islam always knew enough to know that they did not
know everything.
They knew the difference between the eternal decrees of the God of Abraham and the all-too-flawed thoughts of
ordinary people. They knew, in short, that they are not God, who alone is charged with creating and destroying
the world and discriminating along the way between the real and the illusory.
The killers in Libya have forgotten that. So have the not-so-innocent producers and distributors of Innocence
of Islam."
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Stephen Prothero.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045294
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
CNN's Belief Blog: The faith angles behind the biggest stories
Follow the CNN Belief flog on Twitter
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045295
Internet can help free US reporters in NKorea: Clinton
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Monday urged women students to use the Internet to campaign for the release
of two American women journalists held in North Korea. Clinton urged graduates of Barnard College, a women's
university in New York City, to show their opposition to Pyongyang's detention of the two journalists who are due to go
on trial on June 4.
"We have two young women journalists right now imprisoned in North Korea and you can get busy on the Internet and
let the North Koreans know that we find that absolutely unacceptable," Clinton told the graduation ceremony.
Clinton was highlighting the new media tools that women can use to fight injustice around the world.
North Korea announced last Thursday that it had set a June 4 trial date for the two journalists — Euna Lee, a Korean-
American, and Laura Ling, a Chinese-American — but gave no details of the charges against them.
Clinton said afterward that the announcement of a trial date is "a signal that there can be" a resolution of the case soon,
even though she said the pair should be released immediately and the charges against them are "baseless."
The North has previously said they would go on trial for "hostile acts" and illegally entering the country. Their trial would
be held "on the basis of the confirmed crimes committed by them," it has announced.
While working on a story about refugees fleeing the hardline communist North, the pair were detained March 17 along
the narrow Tumen River which marks the border with China.
Internet can help free US reporters in NKorea: Clinton
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Monday urged women students to use the Internet to campaign for the release
of two American women journalists held in North Korea. Clinton urged graduates of Barnard College, a women's
university in New York City, to show their opposition to Pyongyang's detention of the two journalists who are due to go
on trial on June 4.
"We have two young women journalists right now imprisoned in North Korea and you can get busy on the Internet and
let the North Koreans know that we find that absolutely unacceptable," Clinton told the graduation ceremony.
Clinton was highlighting the new media tools that women can use to fight injustice around the world.
North Korea announced last Thursday that it had set a June 4 trial date for the two journalists Euna Lee, a Korean-
American, and Laura Ling, a Chinese-American but gave no details of the charges against them.
Clinton said afterward that the announcement of a trial date is "a signal that there can be" a resolution of the case soon,
even though she said the pair should be released immediately and the charges against them are "baseless."
The North has previously said they would go on trial for "hostile acts" and illegally entering the country. Their trial would
be held "on the basis of the confirmed crimes committed by them," it has announced.
7
While working on a story about refugees fleeing the hardline communist North, the pair were detained March 17 along
the narrow lumen River which marks the border with China.
8
John crosby will be there. He's the tall blonde advance guy who's been on the plane with us a few times too.
He will have program for commencement and acknowledgement card for lunch.
You will go straight backstage and can go to hold if u want to put your robe on unless u put it on in the car.
I'm meeting you at first stop.
I told oscar to pack commencement robe unless u want to use barnards. We would have to take back to dc otherwise.
sbwhoeop
Sunday, January 3, 2010 10:01 AM
H: They asked for 250 words and I wrote slightly more, briefly on China. Sid
2010: global cracks, human prospects (part II)
No•
a■iid Hayes, 2 January 2010
Subjects:
• Democracy and government
• International politics
More openDemocracy authors reflect on a volcanic decade in global politics - continued from part I
openDemocracy deputy editor David Hayes asked openDemocracy writers to reflect on the decade that has passed and
the one that lies ahead by considering three questions:
1)What was the most significant trend in the century's first decade?
2) What do you most hope for, and most fear, about the decade to come?
3) What idea do you see fading and/or emerging in 2010 and beyond?
• Sidney Blumenthal
The greatest challenge for the early 21st century is that China's leadership has contempt for much of the international
order and many of the international organisations developed since the second world war. In pursuit of its narrow and even
crude understanding of its interest, China will constantly abuse and break international rules, protocols and bodies. Its
willful destruction of the Copenhagen summit on climate change reveals the pattern. Its mercantile currency policy in a
beggar-thy-neighbour approach, environmental degradation, and disdain for human rights and the rule of law generally
are the obvious reflections of its despotism. Through its rough and strange neo-imperialism, in Africa especially but also
elsewhere, China is able to gain help, partly through economic intimidation, in its international forays to repel or strike
down the responsibilities of internationalism.
Internally, China is a prison of nations, an empire similar to imperial Russia and the Soviet Union, and may also be the
most unequal industrial country in distribution of income. China's power is increasing, but the authoritarian regime is
hardly the wave of the future as some awestruck worshippers of raw power and money (whether investment bankers or
ex-Marxists) imagine. The system is inherently unstable, which accounts for its rigid currency policy (at root a fear of
operating on other than a virtual slave-labour standard, of turning its poverty-stricken millions into consumers with real
choice, and ultimately of letting go even a little bit).
In the long-term the tyranny of the one-party state and its military rule is at odds with the new economic classes of
entrepreneurs and professionals it has fostered. China's growing economic power is accompanied by expanding
arrogance, demonstrated not least in the incivility and rudeness with which President Obama was treated on his trip there.
China's regime lacks an ideal other than a communist gloss on Confucian uniformity, itself based incoherently on reckless
economic development, for example in the areas of currency, environment and labour; it has no "soft power", not just
because of the coarseness of its supposed diplomacy, but also because its cultural appeal does not travel. China forces
its way through coercion of one sort or another.
The next decade will see how flexible or inflexible its rulers are and how secure their system is. The brief effort at a
rhetorical gesture by some in the Obama administration who floated the turgid phrase "strategic reassurance" was risible
and did not last. For now, the west has no policy to deal with China as it is. The place to begin is on currency.
The most powerful idea for the 21st century is the equality of women. It is the idea most feared by those - from the Vatican
to the Taliban - arrayed against modernity, the still vibrant project of the Enlightenment. Someday the United States may
even have a woman president. It took fifty years after granting the vote to African-Americans to pass a constitutional
amendment giving it to women. Perhaps the distance between electing the first African-American president and the first
female one will not be so great.
Sidney Blumenthal is former senior adviser to President Clinton, and an Oscar and Emmy award-winning documentary
producer. He is writing a book on Abraham Lincoln
Also by Sidney Blumenthal:
"The choice" (21 November 2007)
Sheepishly inquired as to whether you might be willing to speak at Madeira's commencement on June 4th in the
morning. It's her last time officiating as head of the school. It's a couple of days before the Lat Am trip. Thoughts?
The Runaway General
Stanley McChrystal, Obama's top commander in Afghanistan,
has seized control of the war by never taking his eye off the
real enemy: The wimps in the White House
By Michael Hastings
Jun 22, 2010 10:00 AM EDT
This article originally appeared in RS 1108/1109 from July 8-22, 2010.
'Howed I get screwed into going to this dinner?" demands Gen. Stanley McChrystal. It's a Thursday night in mid-April,
and the commander of all U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan is sitting in a four-star suite at the HOtel Westminster in
Paris. He's in France to sell his new war strategy to our NATO allies — to keep up the fiction, in essence, that we actually
have allies. Since McChrystal took over a year ago, the Afghan war has become the exclusive property of the United
States. Opposition to the war has already toppled the Dutch government, forced the resignation of Germany's president
and sparked both Canada and the Netherlands to announce the withdrawal of their 4,500 troops. McChrystal is in Paris to
keep the French, who have lost more than 40 soldiers in Afghanistan, from going all wobbly on him.
"The dinner comes with the position, sir," says his chief of staff, Col. Charlie Flynn.
McChrystal turns sharply in his chair.
"Hey, Charlie," he asks, "does this come with the position?"
McChrystal gives him the middle finger.
The general stands and looks around the suite that his traveling staff of 10 has converted into a full-scale operations
center. The tables are crowded with silver Panasonic Toughbooks, and blue cables crisscross the hotel's thick carpet,
hooked up to satellite dishes to provide encrypted phone and e-mail communications. Dressed in off-the-rack civilian
casual — blue tie, button-down shirt, dress slacks — McChrystal is way out of his comfort zone. Paris, as one of his
advisers says, is the "most anti-McChrystal city you can imagine." The general hates fancy restaurants, rejecting any
place with candles on the tables as too "Gucci." He prefers Bud Light Lime (his favorite beer) to Bordeaux, Talladega
Nights (his favorite movie) to Jean-Luc Godard. Besides, the public eye has never been a place where McChrystal felt
comfortable: Before President Obama put him in charge of the war in Afghanistan, he spent five years running the
Pentagon's most secretive black ops.
"What's the update on the Kandahar bombing?" McChrystal asks Flynn. The city has been rocked by two massive car
bombs in the past day alone, calling into question the general's assurances that he can wrest it from the Taliban.
"We have two KIAs, but that hasn't been confirmed," Flynn says.
McChrystal takes a final look around the suite. At 55, he is gaunt and lean, not unlike an older version of Christian Bale in
Rescue Dawn. His slate-blue eyes have the unsettling ability to drill down when they lock on you. If you've fucked up or
disappointed him, they can destroy your soul without the need for him to raise his voice.
"I'd rather have my ass kicked by a roomful of people than go out to this dinner," McChrystal says.
He pauses a beat.
"Unfortunately," he adds, "no one in this room could do it."
With that, he's out the door.
"Who's he going to dinner with?" I ask one of his aides.
"Some French minister," the aide tells me. "It's fucking gay."
The next morning, McChrystal and his team gather to prepare for a speech he is giving at the Ecole Militaire, a French
military academy. The general prides himself on being sharper and ballsier than anyone else, but his brashness comes
with a price: Although McChrystal has been in charge of the war for only a year, in that short time he has managed to piss
off almost everyone with a stake in the conflict. Last fall, during the question-and-answer session following a speech he
gave in London, McChrystal dismissed the counterterrorism strategy being advocated by Vice President Joe Biden as
"shortsighted," saying it would lead to a state of "Chaos-istan." The remarks earned him a smackdown from the president
himself, who summoned the general to a terse private meeting aboard Air Force One. The message to McChrystal
seemed clear: Shut the fuck up, and keep a lower profile
Now, flipping through printout cards of his speech in Paris, McChrystal wonders aloud what Biden question he might get
today, and how he should respond. "I never know what's going to pop out until I'm up there, that's the problem," he says.
Then, unable to help themselves, he and his staff imagine the general dismissing the vice president with a good one-
liner.
"Are you asking about Vice President Biden?" McChrystal says with a laugh. "Who's that?"
"Biden?" suggests a top adviser. "Did you say: Bite Me?"
When Barack Obama entered the Oval Office, he immediately set out to deliver on his most important campaign
promise on foreign policy: to refocus the war in Afghanistan on what led us to invade in the first place. "I want the
American people to understand," he announced in March 2009. "We have a clear and focused goal: to disrupt, dismantle
and defeat Al Qaeda in Pakistan and Afghanistan." He ordered another 21,000 troops to Kabul, the largest increase since
the war began in 2001. Taking the advice of both the Pentagon and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he also fired Gen. David
McKiernan — then the U.S. and NATO commander in Afghanistan — and replaced him with a man he didn't know and had
met only briefly: Gen. Stanley McChrystal. It was the first time a top general had been relieved from duty during wartime in
more than 50 years, since Harry Truman fired Gen. Douglas MacArthur at the height of the Korean War.
Even though he had voted for Obama, McChrystal and his new commander in chief failed from the outset to connect. The
general first encountered Obama a week after he took office, when the president met with a dozen senior military officials
in a room at the Pentagon known as the Tank. According to sources familiar with the meeting, McChrystal thought Obama
looked "uncomfortable and intimidated" by the roomful of military brass. Their first one-on-one meeting took place in the
Oval Office four months later, after McChrystal got the Afghanistan job, and it didn't go much better. "It was a 10-minute
photo op," says an adviser to McChrystal. "Obama clearly didn't know anything about him, who he was. Here's the guy
who's going to run his fucking war, but he didn't seem very engaged. The Boss was pretty disappointed."
From the start, McChrystal was determined to place his personal stamp on Afghanistan, to use it as a laboratory for a
controversial military strategy known as counterinsurgency. COIN, as the theory is known, is the new gospel of the
Pentagon brass, a doctrine that attempts to square the military's preference for high-tech violence with the demands of
fighting protracted wars in failed states. COIN calls for sending huge numbers of ground troops to not only destroy the
enemy, but to live among the civilian population and slowly rebuild, or build from scratch, another nation's government — a
process that even its staunchest advocates admit requires years, if not decades, to achieve. The theory essentially
rebrands the military, expanding its authority (and its funding) to encompass the diplomatic and political sides of warfare:
Think the Green Berets as an armed Peace Corps. In 2006, after Gen. David Petraeus beta-tested the theory during his
"surge" in Iraq, it quickly gained a hardcore following of think-tankers, journalists, military officers and civilian officials.
Nicknamed "COINdinistas" for their cultish zeal, this influential cadre believed the doctrine would be the perfect solution
for Afghanistan. All they needed was a general with enough charisma and political savvy to implement it.
As McChrystal leaned on Obama to ramp up the war, he did it with the same fearlessness he used to track down terrorists
in Iraq: Figure out how your enemy operates, be faster and more ruthless than everybody else, then take the fuckers out.
After arriving in Afghanistan last June, the general conducted his own policy review, ordered up by Defense Secretary
Robert Gates. The now-infamous report was leaked to the press, and its conclusion was dire: If we didn't send another
40,000 troops — swelling the number of U.S. forces in Afghanistan by nearly half — we were in danger of "mission failure."
The White House was furious. McChrystal, they felt, was trying to bully Obama, opening him up to charges of being weak
on national security unless he did what the general wanted. It was Obama versus the Pentagon, and the Pentagon was
determined to kick the president's ass.
Last fall, with his top general calling for more troops, Obama launched a three-month review to re-evaluate the strategy in
Afghanistan. "I found that time painful," McChrystal tells me in one of several lengthy interviews. "I was selling an
unsellable position." For the general, it was a crash course in Beltway politics — a battle that pitted him against
experienced Washington insiders like Vice President Biden, who argued that a prolonged counterinsurgency campaign in
Afghanistan would plunge America into a military quagmire without weakening international terrorist networks. "The entire
COIN strategy is a fraud perpetuated on the American people," says Douglas Macgregor, a retired colonel and leading
critic of counterinsurgency who attended West Point with McChrystal. "The idea that we are going to spend a trillion
dollars to reshape the culture of the Islamic world is utter nonsense.
In the end, however, McChrystal got almost exactly what he wanted. On December 1st, in a speech at West Point, the
president laid out all the reasons why fighting the war in Afghanistan is a bad idea: It's expensive; we're in an economic
crisis; a decade-long commitment would sap American power; Al Qaeda has shifted its base of operations to Pakistan.
Then, without ever using the words "victory" or "win," Obama announced that he would send an additional 30,000 troops
to Afghanistan, almost as many as McChrystal had requested. The president had thrown his weight, however hesitantly,
behind the counterinsurgency crowd.
Today, as McChrystal gears up for an offensive in southern Afghanistan, the prospects for any kind of success look bleak.
In June, the death toll for U.S. troops passed 1,000, and the number of IEDs has doubled. Spending hundreds of billions
of dollars on the fifth-poorest country on earth has failed to win over the civilian population, whose attitude toward U.S.
troops ranges from intensely wary to openly hostile. Thetiggest military operation of the year — a ferocious offensive that
began in February to retake the southern town of Marja — continues to drag on, prompting McChrystal himself to refer to it
as a "bleeding ulcer." In June, Afghanistan officially outpaced Vietnam as the longest war in American history — and
Obama has quietly begun to back away from the deadline he set for withdrawing U.S. troops in July of next year. The
president finds himself stuck in something even more insane than a quagmire: a quagmire he knowingly walked into, even
though it's precisely the kind of gigantic, mind-numbing, multigenerational nation-building project he explicitly said he
didn't want.
Even those who support McChrystal and his strategy of counterinsurgency know that whatever the general manages to
accomplish in Afghanistan, it's going to look more like Vietnam than Desert Storm. "It's not going to look like a win, smell
like a win or taste like a win," says Maj. Gen. Bill Mayville, who serves as chief of operations for McChrystal. "This is going
to end in an argument."
The night after his speech in Paris, McChrystal and his staff head to Kitty O'Shea's, an Irish pub catering to tourists,
around the corner from the hotel. His wife, Annie, has joined him for a rare visit: Since the Iraq War began in 2003, she
has seen her husband less than 30 days a year. Though it is his and Annie's 33rd wedding anniversary, McChrystal has
invited his inner circle along for dinner and drinks at the "least Gucci" place his staff could find. His wife isn't surprised.
"He once took me to a Jack in the Box when I was dressed in formalwear," she says with a laugh.
The general's staff is a handpicked collection of killers, spies, geniuses, patriots, political operators and outright maniacs.
There's a former head of British Special Forces, two Navy Seals, an Afghan Special Forces commando, a lawyer, two
fighter pilots and at least two dozen combat veterans and counterinsurgency experts. They jokingly refer to themselves as
Team America, taking the name from the South Park-esque sendup of military cluelessness, and they pride themselves
on their can-do attitude and their disdain for authority. After arriving in Kabul last summer, Team America set about
changing the culture of the International Security Assistance Force, as the NATO-led mission is known. (U.S. soldiers had
taken to deriding ISAF as short for "I Suck at Fighting" or "In Sandals and Flip-Flops.") McChrystal banned alcohol on
base, kicked out Burger King and other symbols of American excess, expanded the morning briefing to include thousands
of officers and refashioned the command center into a Situational Awareness Room, a free-flowing information hub
modeled after Mayor Mike Bloomberg's offices in New York. He also set a manic pace for his staff, becoming legendary
for sleeping four hours a night, running seven miles each morning, and eating one meal a day. (In the month I spend
around the general, I witness him eating only once.) It's a kind of superhuman narrative that has built up around him, a
staple in almost every media profile, as if the ability to go without sleep and food translates into the possibility of a man
single-handedly winning the war.
By midnight at Kitty O'Shea's, much of Team America is completely shitfaced. Two officers do an Irish jig mixed with steps
from a traditional Afghan wedding dance, while McChrystal's top advisers lock arms and sing a slurred song of their own
invention."Afghanistan!" they bellow."Afghanistan!" They call it their Afghanistan song.
McChrystal steps away from the circle, observing his team. "All these men," he tells me. "I'd die for them. And they'd die
for me."
The assembled men may look and sound like a bunch of combat veterans letting off steam, but in fact this tight-knit group
represents the most powerful force shaping U.S. policy in Afghanistan. While McChrystal and his men are in indisputable
command of all military aspects of the war, there is no equivalent position on the diplomatic or political side. Instead, an
assortment of administration players compete over the Afghan portfolio: U.S. Ambassador Karl Eikenberry, Special
Representative to Afghanistan Richard Holbrooke, National Security Advisor Jim Jones and Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton, not to mention 40 or so other coalition ambassadors and a host of talking heads who try to insert themselves into
the mess, from John Kerry to John McCain. This diplomatic incoherence has effectively allowed McChrystal's team to call
the shots and hampered efforts to build a stable and credible government in Afghanistan. "It jeopardizes the mission,"
says Stephen Biddle, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations who supports McChrystal. "The military cannot
by itself create governance reform."
Part of the problem is structural: The Defense Department budget exceeds $600 billion a year, while the State
Department receives only $50 billion. But part of the problem is personal: In private, Team McChrystal likes to talk shit
about many of Obama's top people on the diplomatic side. One aide calls Jim Jones, a retired four-star general and
veteran of the Cold War, a "clown" who remains "stuck in 1985." Politicians like McCain and Kerry, says another aide,
"turn up, have a meeting with Karzai, criticize him at the airport press conference, then get back for the Sunday talk
shows. Frankly, it's not very helpful." Only Hillary Clinton receives good reviews from McChrystal's inner circle. "Hillary
had Stan's back during the strategic review," says an adviser. "She said, 'If Stan wants it, give him what he needs.'"
McChrystal reserves special skepticism for Holbrooke, the official in charge of reintegrating the Taliban. "The Boss says
he's like a wounded animal," says a member of the general's team. "Holbrooke keeps hearing rumors that he's going to
get fired, so that makes him dangerous. He's a brilliant guy, but he just comes in, pulls on a lever, whatever he can grasp
onto. But this is COIN, and you can't just have someone yanking on shit."
At one point on his trip to Paris, McChrystal checks his BlackBerry. "Oh, not another e-mail from Holbrooke," he groans. "I
don't even want to open it." He clicks on the message and reads the salutation out loud, then stuffs the BladkBerry back in
his pocket, not bothering to conceal his annoyance.
"Make sure you don't get any of that on your leg," an aide jokes, referring to the e-mail.
By far the most crucial — and strained — relationship is between McChrystal and Eikenberry, the U.S. ambassador.
According to those close to the two men, Eikenberry — a retired three-star general who served in Afghanistan in 2002 and
2005 — can't stand that his former subordinate is now calling the shots. He's also furious that McChrystal, backed by
NATO's allies, refused to put Eikenberry in the pivotal role of viceroy in Afghanistan, which would have made him the
diplomatic equivalent of the general. The job instead went to British Ambassador Mark Sedwill — a move that effectively
increased McChrystal's influence over diplomacy by shutting out a powerful rival. "In reality, that position needs to be filled
by an American for it to have weight," says a U.S. official familiar with the negotiations.
The relationship was further strained in January, when a classified cable that Eikenberry wrote was leaked to The New
York Times. The cable was as scathing as it was prescient. The ambassador offered a brutal critique of McChrystal's
strategy, dismissed President Hamid Karzai as "not an adequate strategic partner," and cast doubt on whether the
counterinsurgency plan would be "sufficient" to deal with Al Qaeda. "We will become more deeply engaged here with no
way to extricate ourselves," Eikenberry warned, "short of allowing the country to descend again into lawlessness and
chaos."
McChrystal and his team were blindsided by the cable. "I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said
anything like that to us before," says McChrystal, who adds that he felt "betrayed" by the leak. "Here's one that covers his
flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so.'"
The most striking example of McChrystal's usurpation of diplomatic policy is his handling of Karzai. It is McChrystal, not
diplomats like Eikenberry or Holbrooke, who enjoys the best relationship with the man America is relying on to lead
Afghanistan. The doctrine of counterinsurgency requires a credible government, and since Karzai is not considered
credible by his own people, McChrystal has worked hard to make him so. Over the past few months, he has accompanied
the president on more than 10 trips around the country, standing beside him at political meetings, or shuras, in Kandahar.
In February, the day before the doomed offensive in Marja, McChrystal even drove over to the president's palace to get
him to sign off on what would be the largest military operation of the year. Karzai's staff, however, insisted that the
president was sleeping off a cold and could not be disturbed. After several hours of haggling, McChrystal finally enlisted
the aid of Afghanistan's defense minister, who persuaded Karzai's people to wake the president from his nap.
This is one of the central flaws with McChrystal's counterinsurgency strategy: The need to build a credible government
puts us at the mercy of whatever tin-pot leader we've backed — a danger that Eikenberry explicitly warned about in his
cable. Even Team McChrystal privately acknowledges that Karzai is a less-than-ideal partner. "He's been locked up in his
palace the past year," laments one of the general's top advisers. At times, Karzai himself has actively undermined
McChrystal's desire to put him in charge. During a recent visit to Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Karzai met three U.S.
soldiers who had been wounded in Uruzgan province. "General," he called out to McChrystal, "I didn't even know we were
fighting in Uruzgan!"
Growing up as a military brat, McChrystal exhibited the mixture of brilliance and cockiness that would follow him
throughout his career. His father fought in Korea and Vietnam, retiring as a two-star general, and his four brothers all
joined the armed services. Moving around to different bases, McChrystal took solace in baseball, a sport in which he
made no pretense of hiding his superiority: In Little League, he would call out strikes to the crowd before whipping a
fastball down the middle.
McChrystal entered West Point in 1972, when the U.S. military was close to its all-time low in popularity. His class was the
last to graduate before the academy started to admit women. The "Prison on the Hudson," as it was known then, was a
potent mix of testosterone, hooliganism and reactionary patriotism. Cadets repeatedly trashed the mess hall in food fights,
and birthdays were celebrated with a tradition called "rat fucking," which often left the birthday boy outside in the snow or
mud, covered in shaving cream. "It was pretty out of control," says Lt. Gen. David Barno, a classmate who went on to
serve as the top commander in Afghanistan from 2003 to 2005. The class, filled with what Barno calls "huge talent" and
"wild-eyed teenagers with a strong sense of idealism," also produced Gen. Ray Odierno, the current commander of U.S.
forces in Iraq.
The son of a general, McChrystal was also a ringleader of the campus dissidents — a dual role that taught him how to
thrive in a rigid, top-down environment while thumbing his nose at authority every chance he got. He accumulated more
than 100 hours of demerits for drinking, partying and insubordination — a record that his classmates boasted made him a
"century man." One classmate, who asked not to be named, recalls finding McChrystal passed out in the shower after
downing a case of beer he had hidden under the sink. The troublemaking almost got him kicked out, and he spent hours
subjected to forced marches in the Area, a paved courtyard where unruly cadets were disciplined. "I'd come visit, and I'd
end up spending most of my time in the library, while Stan was in the Area," recalls Annie, who began dating McChrystal
in 1973.
McChrystal wound up ranking 298 out of a class of 855, a serious underachievement for a man widely regarded as
brilliant. His most compelling work was extracurricular: As managing editor of The Pointer, the West Point literary
magazine, McChrystal wrote seven short stories that eerily foreshadow many of the issues he would confront in his
career. In one tale, a fictional officer complains about the difficulty of training foreign troops to fight; in another, a 19-year-
old soldier kills a boy he mistakes for a terrorist. In "Brinkman's Note," a piece of suspense fiction, the unnamed narrator
appears to be trying to stop a plot to assassinate the president. It turns out, however, that the narrator himself is the
assassin, and he's able to infiltrate the White House: "The President strode in smiling. From the right coat pocket of the
raincoat I carried, I slowly drew forth my 32-caliber pistol. In Brinkman's failure, I had succeeded."
After graduation, 2nd Lt. Stanley McChrystal entered an Army that was all but broken in the wake of Vietnam. "We really
felt we were a peacetime generation," he recalls. "There was the Gulf War, but even that didn't feel like that big of a deal."
So McChrystal spent his career where the action was: He enrolled in Special Forces school and became a regimental
commander of the 3rd Ranger Battalion in 1986. It was a dangerous position, even in peacetime — nearly two dozen
Rangers were killed in training accidents during the Eighties. It was also an unorthodox career path: Most soldiers who
want to climb the ranks to general don't go into the Rangers. Displaying a penchant for transforming systems he considers
outdated, McChrystal set out to revolutionize the training regime for the Rangers. He introduced mixed martial arts,
required every soldier to qualify with night-vision goggles on the rifle range and forced troops to build up their endurance
with weekly marches involving heavy backpacks.
In the late 1990s, McChrystal shrewdly improved his inside game, spending a year at Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government and then at the Council on Foreign Relations, where he co-authored a treatise on the merits and drawbacks
of humanitarian interventionism. But as he moved up through the ranks, McChrystal relied on the skills he had learned as
a troublemaking kid at West Point: knowing precisely how far he could go in a rigid military hierarchy without getting
tossed out. Being a highly intelligent badass, he discovered, could take you far — especially in the political chaos that
followed September 11th. "He was very focused," says Annie. "Even as a young officer he seemed to know what he
wanted to do. I don't think his personality has changed in all these years."
By some accounts, McChrystal's career should have been over at least two times by now. As Pentagon spokesman
during the invasion of Iraq, the general seemed more like a White House mouthpiece than an up-and-coming commander
with a reputation for speaking his mind. When Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld made his infamous "stuff happens"
remark during the looting of Baghdad, McChrystal backed him up. A few days later, he echoed the president's Mission
Accomplished gaffe by insisting that major combat operations in Iraq were over. But it was during his next stint —
overseeing the military's most elite units, including the Rangers, Navy Seals and Delta Force — that McChrystal took part
in a cover-up that would have destroyed the career of a lesser man.
After Cpl. Pat Tillman, the former-NFL-star-turned-Ranger, was accidentally killed by his own troops in Afghanistan in April
2004, McChrystal took an active role in creating the impression that Tillman had died at the hands of Taliban fighters. He
signed off on a falsified recommendation for a Silver Star that suggested Tillman had been killed by enemy fire.
(McChrystal would later claim he didn't read the recommendation closely enough — a strange excuse for a commander
known for his laserlike attention to minute details.) A week later, McChrystal sent a memo up the chain of command,
specifically warning that President Bush should avoid mentioning the cause of Tillman's death. "If the circumstances of
Corporal Tillman's death become public," he wrote, it could cause "public embarrassment" for the president.
"The false narrative, which McChrystal clearly helped construct, diminished Pat's true actions," wrote Tillman's mother,
Mary, in her book Boots on the Ground by Dusk. McChrystal got away with it, she added, because he was the "golden
boy" of Rumsfeld and Bush, who loved his willingness to get things done, even if it included bending the rules or skipping
the chain of command. Nine days after Tillman's death, McChrystal was promoted to major general.
Two years later, in 2006, McChrystal was tainted by a scandal involving detainee abuse and torture at Camp Nama in
Iraq. According to a report by Human Rights Watch, prisoners at the camp were subjected to a now-familiar litany of
abuse: stress positions, being dragged naked through the mud. McChrystal was not disciplined in the scandal, even
though an interrogator at the camp reported seeing him inspect the prison multiple times. But the experience was so
unsettling to McChrystal that he tried to prevent detainee operations from being placed under his command in
Afghanistan, viewing them as a "political swamp," according to a U.S. official. In May 2009, as McChrystal prepared for
his confirmation hearings, his staff prepared him for hard questions about Camp Nama and the Tillman cover-up. But the
scandals barely made a ripple in Congress, and McChrystal was soon on his way back to Kabul to run the war in
Afghanistan.
The media, to a large extent, have also given McChrystal a pass on both controversies. Where Gen. Petraeus is kind of a
dweeb, a teacher's pet with a Ranger's tab, McChrystal is a snake-eating rebel, a "Jedi" commander, as Newsweek called
him. He didn't care when his teenage son came home with blue hair and a mohawk. He speaks his mind with a candor
rare for a high-ranking official. He asks for opinions, and seems genuinely interested in the response. He gets briefings on
his iPod and listens to books on tape. He carries a custom-made set of nunchucks in his convoy engraved with his name
and four stars, and his itinerary often bears a fresh quote from Bruce Lee. ("There are no limits. There are only plateaus,
and you must not stay there, you must go beyond them.") He went out on dozens of nighttime raids during his time in Iraq,
unprecedented for a top commander, and turned up on missions unannounced, with almost no entourage. "The fucking
lads love Stan McChrystal," says a British officer who serves in Kabul. "You'd be out in Somewhere, Iraq, and someone
would take a knee beside you, and a corporal would be like 'Who the fuck is that?' And it's fucking Stan McChrystal."
It doesn't hurt that McChrystal was also extremely successful as head of the Joint Special Operations Command, the elite
forces that carry out the government's darkest ops. During the Iraq surge, his team killed and captured thousands of
insurgents, including Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of Al Qaeda in Iraq. "JSOC was a killing machine," says Maj. Gen.
Mayville, his chief of operations. McChrystal was also open to new ways of killing. He systematically mapped out terrorist
networks, targeting specific insurgents and hunting them down — often with the help of cyberfreaks traditionally shunned
by the military. "The Boss would find the 24-year-old kid with a nose ring, with some fucking brilliant degree from MIT,
sitting in the corner with 16 computer monitors humming," says a Special Forces commando who worked with McChrystal
in Iraq and now serves on his staff in Kabul. "He'd say, 'Hey — you fucking muscleheads couldn't find lunch without help.
You got to work together with these guys.'"
Even in his new role as America's leading evangelist for counterinsurgency, McChrystal retains the deep-seated instincts
of a terrorist hunter. To put pressure on the Taliban, he has upped the number of Special Forces units in Afghanistan from
four to 19. "You better be out there hitting four or five targets tonight," McChrystal will tell a Navy Seal he sees in the
hallway at headquarters. Then he'll add, "I'm going to have to scold you in the morning for it, though." In fact, the general
frequently finds himself apologizing for the disastrous consequences of counterinsurgency. In the first four months of this
year, NATO forces killed some 90 civilians, up 76 percent from the same period in 2009 — a record that has created
tremendous resentment among the very population that COIN theory is intent on winning over. In February, a Special
Forces night raid ended in the deaths of two pregnant Afghan women and allegations of a cover-up, and in April, protests
erupted in Kandahar after U.S. forces accidentally shot up a bus, killing five Afghans. "We've shot an amazing number of
people," McChrystal recently conceded.
Despite the tragedies and miscues, McChrystal has issued some of the strictest directives to avoid civilian casualties that
the U.S. military has ever encountered in a war zone. It's "insurgent math," as he calls it — for every innocent person you
kill, you create 10 new enemies. He has ordered convoys to curtail their reckless driving, put restrictions on the use of air
power and severely limited night raids. He regularly apologizes to Hamid Karzai when civilians are killed, and berates
commanders responsible for civilian deaths. "For a while," says one U.S. official, "the most dangerous place to be in
Afghanistan was in front of McChrystal after a 'civ cas' incident." The ISAF command has even discussed ways to make
not killing into something you can win an award for: There's talk of creating a new medal for "courageous restraint," a
buzzword that's unlikely to gain much traction in the gung-ho culture of the U.S. military.
But however strategic they may be, McChrystal's new marching orders have caused an intense backlash among his own
troops. Being told to hold their fire, soldiers complain, puts them in greater danger. "Bottom line?" says a former Special
Forces operator who has spent years in Iraq and Afghanistan. "I would love to kick McChrystal in the nuts. His rules of
engagement put soldiers' lives in even greater danger. Every real soldier will tell you the same thing."
In March, McChrystal traveled to Combat Outpost JFM — a small encampment on the outskirts of Kandahar — to confront
such accusations from the troops directly. It was a typically bold move by the general. Only two days earlier, he had
received an e-mail from Israel Arroyo, a 25-year-old staff sergeant who asked McChrystal to go on a mission with his unit.
"I am writing because it was said you don't care about the troops and have made it harder to defend ourselves," Arroyo
wrote.
Within hours, McChrystal responded personally: "I'm saddened by the accusation that I don't care about soldiers, as it is
something I suspect any soldier takes both personally and professionally — at least I do. But I know perceptions depend
upon your perspective at the time, and I respect that every soldier's view is his own." Then he showed up at Arroyo's
outpost and went on a foot patrol with the troops — not some bullshit photo-op stroll through a market, but a real live
operation in a dangerous war zone.
Six weeks later, just before McChrystal returned from Paris, the general received another e-mail from Arroyo. A 23-year-
old corporal named Michael Ingram — one of the soldiers McChrystal had gone on patrol with — had been killed by an IED
a day earlier. It was the third man the 25-member platoon had lost in a year, and Arroyo was writing to see if the general
would attend Ingram's memorial service. "He started to look up to you," Arroyo wrote. McChrystal said he would try to
make it down to pay his respects as soon as possible.
The night before the general is scheduled to visit Sgt. Arroyo's platoon for the memorial, I arrive at Combat Outpost JFM
to speak with the soldiers he had gone on patrol with. JFM is a small encampment, ringed by high blast walls and guard
towers. Almost all of the soldiers here have been on repeated combat tours in both Iraq and Afghanistan, and have seen
some of the worst fighting of both wars. But they are especially angered by Ingram's death. His commanders had
repeatedly requested permission to tear down the house where Ingram was killed, noting that it was often used as a
combat position by the Taliban. But due to McChrystal's new restrictions to avoid upsetting civilians, the request had been
denied. "These were abandoned houses," fumes Staff Sgt. Kennith Hicks. "Nobody was coming back to live in them."
One soldier shows me the list of new regulations the platoon was given. "Patrol only in areas that you are reasonably
certain that you will not have to defend yourselves with lethal force," the laminated card reads. For a soldier who has
traveled halfway around the world to fight, that's like telling a cop he should only patrol in areas where he knows he won't
have to make arrests. "Does that make any fucking sense?" asks Pfc. Jared Pautsch. "We should just drop a fucking
bomb on this place. You sit and ask yourself: What are we doing here?"
The rules handed out here are not what McChrystal intended — they've been distorted as they passed through the chain of
command — but knowing that does nothing to lessen the anger of troops on the ground. "Fuck, when I came over here and
heard that McChrystal was in charge, I thought we would get our fucking gun on," says Hicks, who has served three tours
of combat. "I get COIN. I get all that. McChrystal comes here, explains it, it makes sense. But then he goes away on his
bird, and by the time his directives get passed down to us through Big Army, they're all fucked up — either because
somebody is trying to cover their ass, or because they just don't understand it themselves. But we're fucking losing this
thing."
McChrystal and his team show up the next day. Underneath a tent, the general has a 45-minute discussion with some two
dozen soldiers. The atmosphere is tense. "I ask you what's going on in your world, and I think it's important for you all to
understand the big picture as well," McChrystal begins. "How's the company doing? You guys feeling sorry for
yourselves? Anybody? Anybody feel like you're losing?" McChrystal says.
"Sir, some of the guys here, sir, think we're losing, sir," says Hicks.
McChrystal nods. "Strength is leading when you just don't want to lead," he tells the men. "You're leading by example.
That's what we do. Particularly when it's really, really hard, and it hurts inside." Then he spends 20 minutes talking about
counterinsurgency, diagramming his concepts and principles on a whiteboard. He makes COIN seem like common sense,
but he's careful not to bullshit the men. "We are knee-deep in the decisive year," he tells them. The Taliban, he insists, no
longer has the initiative — "but I don't think we do, either." It's similar to the talk he gave in Paris, but it's not winning any
hearts and minds among the soldiers. "This is the philosophical part that works with think tanks," McChrystal tries to joke.
"But it doesn't get the same reception from infantry companies."
During the question-and-answer period, the frustration boils over. The soldiers complain about not being allowed to use
lethal force, about watching insurgents they detain be freed for lack of evidence. They want to be able to fight — like they
did in Iraq, like they had in Afghanistan before McChrystal. 'We aren't putting fear into the Taliban," one soldier says.
"Winning hearts and minds in COIN is a coldblooded thing," McChrystal says, citing an oft-repeated maxim that you can't
kill your way out of Afghanistan. "The Russians killed 1 million Afghans, and that didn't work."
"I'm not saying go out and kill everybody, sir," the soldier persists. "You say we've stopped the momentum of the
insurgency. I don't believe that's true in this area. The more we pull back, the more we restrain ourselves, the stronger it's
getting."
"I agree with you," McChrystal says. "In this area, we've not made progress, probably. You have to show strength here,
you have to use fire. What I'm telling you is, fire costs you. What do you want to do? You want to wipe the population out
here and resettle it?"
A soldier complains that under the rules, any insurgent who doesn't have a weapon is immediately assumed to be a
civilian. "That's the way this game is," McChrystal says. "It's complex. I can't just decide: It's shirts and skins, and we'll kill
all the shirts."
As the discussion ends, McChrystal seems to sense that he hasn't succeeded at easing the men's anger. He makes one
last-ditch effort to reach them, acknowledging the death of Cpl. Ingram. "There's no way I can make that easier," he tells
them. "No way I can pretend it won't hurt. No way I can tell you not to feel that. . . . I will tell you, you're doing a great job.
Don't let the frustration get to you." The session ends with no clapping, and no real resolution. McChrystal may have sold
President Obama on counterinsurgency, but many of his own men aren't buying it.
When it comes to Afghanistan, history is not on McChrystal's side. The only foreign invader to have any success here
was Genghis Khan — and he wasn't hampered by things like human rights, economic development and press scrutiny.
The COIN doctrine, bizarrely, draws inspiration from some of the biggest Western military embarrassments in recent
memory: France's nasty war in Algeria (lost in 1962) and the American misadventure in Vietnam (lost in 1975).
McChrystal, like other advocates of COIN, readily acknowledges that counterinsurgency campaigns are inherently messy,
expensive and easy to lose. "Even Afghans are confused by Afghanistan," he says. But even if he somehow manages to
succeed, after years of bloody fighting with Afghan kids who pose no threat to the U.S. homeland, the war will do little to
shut down Al Qaeda, which has shifted its operations to Pakistan. Dispatching 150,000 troops to build new schools,
roads, mosques and water-treatment facilities around Kandahar is like trying to stop the drug war in Mexico by occupying
Arkansas and building Baptist churches in Little Rock. "It's all very cynical, politically," says Marc Sageman, a former CIA
case officer who has extensive experience in the region. "Afghanistan is not in our vital interest — there's nothing for us
there."
In mid-May, two weeks after visiting the troops in Kandahar, McChrystal travels to the White House for a high-level visit by
Hamid Karzai. It is a triumphant moment for the general, one that demonstrates he is very much in command — both in
Kabul and in Washington. In the East Room, which is packed with journalists and dignitaries, President Obama sings the
praises of Karzai. The two leaders talk about how great their relationship is, about the pain they feel over civilian
casualties. They mention the word "progress" 16 times in under an hour. But there is no mention of victory. Still, the •
session represents the most forceful commitment that Obama has made to McChrystal's strategy in months. "There is no
denying the progress that the Afghan people have made in recent years — in education, in health care and economic
development," the president says. "As I saw in the lights across Kabul when I landed — lights that would not have been
visible just a few years earlier."
It is a disconcerting observation for Obama to make. During the worst years in Iraq, when the Bush administration had no
real progress to point to, officials used to offer up the exact same evidence of success. "It was one of our first
impressions," one GOP official said in 2006, after landing in Baghdad at the height of the sectarian violence. "So many
lights shining brightly." So it is to the language of the Iraq War that the Obama administration has turned — talk of
progress, of city lights, of metrics like health care and education. Rhetoric that just a few years ago they would have
mocked. "They are trying to manipulate perceptions because there is no definition of victory — because victory is not even
defined or recognizable," says Celeste Ward, a senior defense analyst at the RAND Corporation who served as a political
adviser to U.S. commanders in Iraq in 2006. "That's the game we're in right now. What we need, for strategic purposes, is
to create the perception that we didn't get run off. The facts on the ground are not great, and are not going to become
great in the near future."
But facts on the ground, as history has proven, offer little deterrent to a military determined to stay the course. Even those
closest to McChrystal know that the rising anti-war sentiment at home doesn't begin to reflect how deeply fucked up things
are in Afghanistan. "If Americans pulled back and started paying attention to this war, it would become even less popular,"
a senior adviser to McChrystal says. Such realism, however, doesn't prevent advocates of counterinsurgency from
dreaming big: Instead of beginning to withdraw troops next year, as Obama promised, the military hopes to ramp up its
counterinsurgency campaign even further. "There's a possibility we could ask for another surge of U.S. forces next
summer if we see success here," a senior military official in Kabul tells me.
Back in Afghanistan, less than a month after the White House meeting with Karzai and all the talk of "progress,"
McChrystal is hit by the biggest blow to his vision of counterinsurgency. Since last year, the Pentagon had been planning
to launch a major military operation this summer in Kandahar, the country's second-largest city and the Taliban's original
home base. It was supposed to be a decisive turning point in the war — the primary reason for the troop surge that
McChrystal wrested from Obama late last year. But on June 10th, acknowledging that the military still needs to lay more
groundwork, the general announced that he is postponing the offensive until the fall. Rather than one big battle, like
Fallujah or Ramadi, U.S. troops will implement what McChrystal calls a "rising tide of security." The Afghan police and
army will enter Kandahar to attempt to seize control of neighborhoods, while the U.S. pours $90 million of aid into the city
to win over the civilian population.
Even proponents of counterinsurgency are hard-pressed to explain the new plan. "This isn't a classic operation," says a
U.S. military official. "It's not going to be Black Hawk Down. There aren't going to be doors kicked in." Other U.S. officials
insist that doors are going to be kicked in, but that it's going to be a kinder, gentler offensive than the disaster in Marja.
"The Taliban have a jackboot on the city," says a military official. "We have to remove them, but we have to do it in a way
that doesn't alienate the population." When Vice President Biden was briefed on the new plan in the Oval Office, insiders
say he was shocked to see how much it mirrored the more gradual plan of counterterrorism that he advocated last fall.
"This looks like CT-plus!" he said, according to U.S. officials familiar with the meeting.
Whatever the nature of the new plan, the delay underscores the fundamental flaws of counterinsurgency. After nine years
of war, the Taliban simply remains too strongly entrenched for the U.S. military to openly attack. The very people that
COIN seeks to win over — the Afghan people — do not want us there. Our supposed ally, President Karzai, used his
influence to delay the offensive, and the massive influx of aid championed by McChrystal is likely only to make things
worse. "Throwing money at the problem exacerbates the problem," says Andrew Wilder, an expert at Tufts University who
has studied the effect of aid in southern Afghanistan. "A tsunami of cash fuels corruption, delegitimizes the government
and creates an environment where we're picking winners and losers" — a process that fuels resentment and hostility
among the civilian population. So far, counterinsurgency has succeeded only in creating a never-ending demand for the
primary product supplied by the military: perpetual war. There is a reason that President Obama studiously avoids using
the word "victory" when he talks about Afghanistan. Winning, it would seem, is not really possible. Not even with
Stanley McChrystal in charge.
This article originally appeared in RS 1108/1109 from July 8-22, 2010.
Madam Secretary,
As requested, below is a brief bio (compiled by DK, INR, and AF) of Kenyan Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Richard
Momoima Onyonka, who you met in Krakow at the Community of Democracies. Please let me know if you would like
any further information or follow up on this.
Thanks,
Mike
Richard Momoima Onyonka is a Kenyan politician and belongs to the People's Democratic Party. Born in 1962 and
hailing from the Bogeka clan, VM Momoima has lived in Otamba, Nyamataro, Mosocho and Nairobi. In 1982, following
the failed Kenyan coup d'etat attempt to overthrow President Daniel Arap Moi's government, VM Momoima was among
the 900 people that were jailed. However, in 1984, he returned to the University of Nairobi and graduated with a
Bachelors degree in commerce a year later. After graduation, VM Momoima attended North Carolina State University
where he graduated with a Masters degree in management. He returned to Kenya in 1992 during the first multi party
elections to help his father (then incumbent MP for Kitutu Chache and Minister for Planning and National Development)
who was seeking re-election on a KANU (Kenya African National Union) ticket. VM Momoima's first political opportunity
arose when his father passed away in 1996, which prompted an election in which he lost to a new corner during the
party (KANU) nominations. Since the Kenyan parliamentary election in 2007, VM Momoima has represented the Kitutu
Chache Constituency in the National Assembly of Kenya.
A financial economist by profession, VM Momoima currently runs personal businesses in Nairobi and Kisii and has held
positions in the Kisii KANU branch. His priorities include economic empowerment, particularly for youth and women,
education, and poverty reduction.
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
B6
FYI - will get Rob to write him a note unless you already did one for his own graduation.
I'd like to give him a law school graduation gift. Let's discuss tomorrow.
