The snow is deep on the ground.   
Always the light falls 
Softly down on the hair of my belovèd. 
This is a good world. 
The war has failed. 
God shall not forget us. 
Who made the snow waits where love is. 
Only a few go mad. 
The sky moves in its whiteness 
Like the withered hand of an old king.   
Who made the sky knows of our love. 
The snow is beautiful on the ground.   
And always the lights of heaven glow   
Ay, gaze upon her rose-wreathed hair,
      And gaze upon her smile;
Seem as you drank the very air
      Her breath perfumed the while:
And wake for her the gifted line,
      That wild and witching lay,
And swear your heart is as a shrine,
      That only owns her sway.
’Tis well: I am revenged at last,—
      Mark you that scornful cheek,—
The eye averted as you pass’d,
      Spoke more than words could speak.
Ay, now by all the bitter tears
      That I have shed for thee,—
The racking doubts, the burning fears,—
      Avenged they well may be—
By the nights pass’d in sleepless care,
      The days of endless woe;
All that you taught my heart to bear,
      All that yourself will know.
I would not wish to see you laid
      Within an early tomb;
I should forget how you betray’d,
      And only weep your doom:
But this is fitting punishment,
      To live and love in vain,—
Oh my wrung heart, be thou content,
      And feed upon his pain.
Go thou and watch her lightest sigh,—
      Thine own it will not be;
And bask beneath her sunny eye,—
      It will not turn on thee.
’Tis well: the rack, the chain, the wheel,
      Far better hadst thou proved;
Ev’n I could almost pity feel,
      For thou art nor beloved. 
“Hope” is the thing with feathers - 
That perches in the soul - 
And sings the tune without the words - 
And never stops - at all - 
And sweetest - in the Gale - is heard - 
And sore must be the storm - 
That could abash the little Bird 
That kept so many warm - 
I’ve heard it in the chillest land - 
And on the strangest Sea - 
Yet - never - in Extremity, 
It asked a crumb - of me. 
It’s the mystery of the hunt that intrigues me,
                    That drives us like lemmings, but cautiously—
 The search for a bright square cloud—the scent of lemon verbena—
                     Or to learn rules for the game the sea otters
                                       Play in the surf.
  
                   It is these small things—and the secret behind them
                                     That fill the heart.
                         The pattern, the spirit, the fiery demon
                                 That link them together
                       And pull their freedom into our senses, 
              The smell of a shrub, a cloud, the action of animals
          —The rising, the exuberance, when the mystery is unveiled.
                                  It is these small things
                    That when brought into vision become an inferno.
 ﻿ 
An idle lingerer on the wayside's road,
  He gathers up his work and yawns away;
  A little longer, ere the tiresome load
  Shall be reduced to ashes or to clay.
  No matter if the world has marched along,
  And scorned his slowness as it quickly passed;
  No matter, if amid the busy throng,
  He greets some face, infantile at the last.
  His mission? Well, there is but one,
  And if it is a mission he knows it, nay,
  To be a happy idler, to lounge and sun,
  And dreaming, pass his long-drawn days away.
  So dreams he on, his happy life to pass
  Content, without ambitions painful sighs,
  Until the sands run down into the glass;
  He smiles—content—unmoved and dies.
  And yet, with all the pity that you feel
  For this poor mothling of that flame, the world;
  Are you the better for your desperate deal,
  When you, like him, into infinitude are hurled? 
For John SkoylesMy daughter made drawings with the pens you sent,
line drawings that suggest the things they represent,
different from any drawings she — at ten — had done,
closer to real art, implying what the mind fills in.
For her mother she made a flower fragile on its stem;
for me, a lion, calm, contained, but not a handsome one.
She drew a lion for me once before, on a get-well card,
and wrote I must be brave even when it’s hard.
Such love is healing — as you know, my friend,
especially when it comes unbidden from our children
despite the flaws they see so vividly in us.
Who can love you as your child does?
Your son so ill, the brutal chemo, his looming loss
owning you now — yet you would be this generous
to think of my child. With the pens you sent
she has made I hope a healing instrument. 
I language want to dress my fancies in, 
The hair's uncurled, the garment's loose and thin.
Had they but silver lace to make them gay,
They'd be more courted than in poor array; 
Or, had they art, would make a better show;
But they are plain; yet cleanly do they go.
The world in bravery doth take delight,
And glistering shows do more attract the sight: 
And every one doth honor a rich hood,
As if the outside made the inside good.
And every one doth bow and give the place, 
Not for the man's sake but the silver lace.
Let me intreat in my poor book's behalf,
That all will not adore the golden calf.
Consider, pray, gold hath no life therein,
And life, in nature, is the richest thing.
Be just, let Fancy have the upper place,
And then my verses may perchance find grace. 
A free bird leaps 
on the back of the wind   
and floats downstream   
till the current ends 
and dips his wing 
in the orange sun rays 
and dares to claim the sky. 
But a bird that stalks 
down his narrow cage 
can seldom see through 
his bars of rage 
his wings are clipped and   
his feet are tied 
so he opens his throat to sing. 
The caged bird sings   
with a fearful trill   
of things unknown   
but longed for still   
and his tune is heard   
on the distant hill   
for the caged bird   
sings of freedom. 
The free bird thinks of another breeze 
and the trade winds soft through the sighing trees 
and the fat worms waiting on a dawn bright lawn 
and he names the sky his own 
But a caged bird stands on the grave of dreams   
his shadow shouts on a nightmare scream   
his wings are clipped and his feet are tied   
Go, dumb-born book, 
Tell her that sang me once that song of Lawes: 
Hadst thou but song 
As thou hast subjects known, 
Then were there cause in thee that should condone 
Even my faults that heavy upon me lie 
And build her glories their longevity. 
Tell her that sheds 
Such treasure in the air, 
Recking naught else but that her graces give 
Life to the moment, 
I would bid them live 
As roses might, in magic amber laid, 
Red overwrought with orange and all made 
One substance and one colour 
Braving time. 
Tell her that goes 
With song upon her lips 
But sings not out the song, nor knows 
The maker of it, some other mouth, 
May be as fair as hers, 
Might, in new ages, gain her worshippers, 
When our two dusts with Waller’s shall be laid, 
Siftings on siftings in oblivion, 
Till change hath broken down 
All things save Beauty alone.  
Why should your fair eyes with such sovereign grace 
Disperse their rays on every vulgar spirit, 
Whilst I in darkness in the self-same place 
Get not one glance to recompense my merit? 
So doth the ploughman gaze the wandering star, 
And only rest contented with the light, 
That never learned what constellations are, 
Beyond the bent of his unknowing sight, 
O! why should beauty, custom to obey, 
To their gross sense apply herself so ill? 
Would God I were as ignorant as they, 
When I am made unhappy by my skill; 
Only compelled on this poor good to boast, 
Heavens are not kind to them that know them most. 
The saris go by me from the embassies. 
Cloth from the moon. Cloth from another planet.   
They look back at the leopard like the leopard. 
And I.... 
               this print of mine, that has kept its color   
Alive through so many cleanings; this dull null   
Navy I wear to work, and wear from work, and so   
To my bed, so to my grave, with no 
Complaints, no comment: neither from my chief,   
The Deputy Chief Assistant, nor his chief— 
Only I complain.... this serviceable 
Body that no sunlight dyes, no hand suffuses 
But, dome-shadowed, withering among columns,   
Wavy beneath fountains—small, far-off, shining   
In the eyes of animals, these beings trapped   
As I am trapped but not, themselves, the trap,   
Aging, but without knowledge of their age, 
Kept safe here, knowing not of death, for death— 
Oh, bars of my own body, open, open! 
The world goes by my cage and never sees me.   
And there come not to me, as come to these, 
The wild beasts, sparrows pecking the llamas’ grain,   
Pigeons settling on the bears’ bread, buzzards   
Tearing the meat the flies have clouded.... 
                                                                Vulture,   
When you come for the white rat that the foxes left, 
Take off the red helmet of your head, the black 
Wings that have shadowed me, and step to me as man: 
The wild brother at whose feet the white wolves fawn, 
To whose hand of power the great lioness 
Stalks, purring.... 
                              You know what I was, 
You see what I am: change me, change me! 
               Busy old fool, unruly sun, 
               Why dost thou thus, 
Through windows, and through curtains call on us? 
Must to thy motions lovers' seasons run? 
               Saucy pedantic wretch, go chide 
               Late school boys and sour prenticesprentices apprentices, 
         Go tell court huntsmen that the king will ride,the king will ride James I, the king of England at the time of Donne’s writing, had a known passion for riding horses and hunting. 
         Call country ants to harvest offices, 
Love, all alike, no season knows nor clime, 
Nor hours, days, months, which are the rags of time.rags of time a figure of speech meaning that such things are passing and immaterial. Donne uses this phrase in one of his sermons. 
               Thy beams, so reverendreverend worthy of high respect and strong 
               Why shouldst thou think? 
I could eclipse and cloud them with a wink, 
But that I would not lose her sight so long; 
               If her eyes have not blinded thine, 
               Look, and tomorrow late, tell me, 
         Whether both th' Indias of spice and mineboth th’ Indias of spice and mine the East Indies for spices and the West Indies for gold. In a 1623 letter to Sir Robert Ker, Donne wrote: “Your way into Spain was Eastward, and that is the way to the land of Perfumes and Spices; their way hither is Westward, and that is the way to the land of Gold, and of Mynes.” [John Donne: Selected Prose. Edited by Helen Gardner and Timothy Healy, p. 155] 
         Be where thou leftst them, or lie here with me. 
Ask for those kings whom thou saw'st yesterday, 
And thou shalt hear, All here in one bed lay. 
               She's all states, and all princes, I, 
               Nothing else is. 
Princes do but play us; compared to this, 
All honor's mimic, all wealth alchemyalchemy figuratively, not the real thing. The speculative practice of alchemy involved a search for chemically turning base metals, such as iron, into highly valuable metals, such as gold.. 
               Thou, sun, art half as happy as we, 
               In that the world's contracted thus. 
         Thine age asks ease, and since thy duties be 
         To warm the world, that's done in warming us. 
Shine here to us, and thou art everywhere; 
This bed thy center is, these walls, thy sphere. 
 
1 
“must represent the governess   
for, of course, the creature itself   
could not inspire such terror.” 
staring at me fixedly, no   
trace of recognition. 
“when the window opened of its own accord.   
In the big walnut tree 
were six or seven wolves ... 
strained attention. They were white.”   
(The fear of cloudy skies.) 
like strangers! After five years 
Misgiving. Misdoubt. 
2 
(The fear that one is dreaming.) 
The moon was shining, suddenly   
everything around me appeared   
(The fear of) 
unfamiliar. 
Wild vista 
inside or near the home. 
(Dread of bearing a monster.) 
If I failed to overlook the torn cushions, 
three teapots side by side,   
strewn towels, socks, papers— 
both foreign and stale.   
3 
when I saw the frame was rotten,   
crumbling away from the glass, 
in spots, in other places still attached   
with huge globs of putty. 
The doctor forced me to repeat the word.   
Chimera. Cold feet. 
scared and unreal looking at buildings.   
The thin Victorians with scaly paint,   
their flimsy backporches linked 
by skeletal stairways. 
4 
After five years 
(The fear that you are not at home.) 
I was sitting in the alcove where I never sit   
when I noticed a single eye, 
crudely drawn in pencil,   
in a corner near the floor. 
The paint was blistering— 
beneath it I saw white. 
5 
Sparrows settle on the sagging wires.   
(Fear of sights not turned to words.) 
Horrific. Grisly.   
“Rumplestiltskin!” 
Not my expression. 
Not my net of veins   
beneath thin skin. 
(A morbid dread of throbbing.)   
Of its own accord 
Sorrow is my own yard 
where the new grass 
flames as it has flamed 
often before, but not 
with the cold fire 
that closes round me this year. 
Thirty-five years 
I lived with my husband. 
The plum tree is white today 
with masses of flowers. 
Masses of flowers 
load the cherry branches 
and color some bushes 
yellow and some red, 
but the grief in my heart 
is stronger than they, 
for though they were my joy 
formerly, today I notice them 
and turn away forgetting. 
Today my son told me 
that in the meadows, 
at the edge of the heavy woods 
in the distance, he saw 
trees of white flowers. 
I feel that I would like 
to go there 
and fall into those flowers 
and sink into the marsh near them. 
O the days gone by! O the days gone by! 
The apples in the orchard, and the pathway through the rye; 
The chirrup of the robin, and the whistle of the quail 
As he piped across the meadows sweet as any nightingale; 
When the bloom was on the clover, and the blue was in the sky, 
And my happy heart brimmed over in the days gone by. 
In the days gone by, when my naked feet were tripped 
By the honey-suckle’s tangles where the water-lilies dipped, 
And the ripples of the river lipped the moss along the brink 
Where the placid-eyed and lazy-footed cattle came to drink, 
And the tilting snipe stood fearless of the truant’s wayward cry 
And the splashing of the swimmer, in the days gone by. 
The music of the laughing lip, the luster of the eye; 
The childish faith in fairies, and Aladdin’s magic ring— 
The simple, soul-reposing, glad belief in everything,— 
When life was like a story, holding neither sob nor sigh, 
In the golden olden glory of the days gone by. 
1.
How blest the land that counts among 
      Her sons so many good and wise, 
To execute great feats of tongue 
      When troubles rise. 
Behold them mounting every stump, 
      By speech our liberty to guard. 
Observe their courage—see them jump, 
      And come down hard! 
"Walk up, walk up!" each cries aloud, 
      "And learn from me what you must do 
To turn aside the thunder cloud, 
      The earthquake too. 
"Beware the wiles of yonder quack 
      Who stuffs the ears of all that pass. 
I—I alone can show that black 
      Is white as grass." 
They shout through all the day and break 
      The silence of the night as well. 
They'd make—I wish they'd go and make— 
      Of Heaven a Hell. 
A advocates free silver, B 
      Free trade and C free banking laws. 
Free board, clothes, lodging would from me 
      Win warm applause. 
Lo, D lifts up his voice: "You see 
      The single tax on land would fall 
On all alike." More evenly 
      No tax at all. 
"With paper money," bellows E, 
      "We'll all be rich as lords." No doubt— 
And richest of the lot will be 
      The chap without. 
As many "cures" as addle-wits 
      Who know not what the ailment is! 
Meanwhile the patient foams and spits 
      Like a gin fizz. 
Alas, poor Body Politic, 
      Your fate is all too clearly read: 
To be not altogether quick, 
      Nor very dead. 
You take your exercise in squirms, 
      Your rest in fainting fits between. 
'Tis plain that your disorder's worms— 
      Worms fat and lean. 
Worm Capital, Worm Labor dwell 
      Within your maw and muscle's scope. 
Their quarrels make your life a Hell, 
      Your death a hope. 
God send you find not such an end 
      To ills however sharp and huge! 
God send you convalesce! God send 
      You vermifuge. 
Inventing a horse is not easy.
One must not only think of the horse.
One must dig fence posts around him.
One must include a place where horses like to live;
 
or do when they live with humans like you.
Slowly, you must walk him in the cold;
feed him bran mash, apples;
accustom him to the harness;
holding in mind even when you are tired
harnesses and tack cloths and saddle oil
to keep the saddle clean as a face in the sun;
one must imagine teaching him to run
among the knuckles of tree roots,
not to be skittish at first sight of timber wolves,
and not to grow thin in the city,
where at some point you will have to live;
and one must imagine the absence of money.
Most of all, though: the living weight,
the sound of his feet on the needles,
and, since he is heavy, and real,
and sometimes tired after a run
down the river with a light whip at his side,
one must imagine love
in the mind that does not know love,
an animal mind, a love that does not depend
on your image of it,
your understanding of it;
indifferent to all that it lacks:
a muzzle and two black eyes
looking the day away, a field empty
of everything but witchgrass, fluent trees,
and some piles of hay. 
That scraping of iron on iron when the wind   
rises, what is it? Something the wind won’t   
quit with, but drags back and forth. 
Sometimes faint, far, then suddenly, close, just   
beyond the screened door, as if someone there   
squats in the dark honing his wares against   
my threshold. Half steel wire, half metal wing,   
nothing and anything might make this noise   
of saws and rasps, a creaking and groaning 
of bone-growth, or body-death, marriages of rust,   
or ore abraded. Tonight, something bows 
that should not bend. Something stiffens that should   
slide. Something, loose and not right,   
rakes or forges itself all night. 
In this poem there is no suffering.
It spans hundreds of years and records
no deaths, connecting when it can,
those moments where people are healthy
and happy, content to be alive. A Chapter,
maybe a Volume, shorn of violence
consists of an adult reading aimlessly.
This line is the length of a full life
smuggled in while no one was plotting
against a neighbour, except in jest.
Then, after a gap, comes Nellie. She
is in a drought-fisted field
 with a hoe. This is her twelfth year
on the land, and today her back
doesn’t hurt. Catechisms of self-pity
and of murder have declared a day’s truce
in the Civil War within her. So today,
we can bring Nellie, content with herself,
with the world, into our History.
For a day. In the next generation
we find a suitable subject camping
near the border of a divided country:
for a while no one knows how near. For these
few lines she is ours. But how about
the lovers? you ask, the freshly-washed
body close to yours; sounds, smells, tastes;
anticipation of the young, the edited memory
of the rest of us? How about thoughts
higher than their thinkers?...Yes, yes.
Give them half a line and a mass of footnotes:
they have their own privileged history,
like inherited income beside our husbandry.
We bring our History up to date
in a city like London: someone’s just paid
the mortgage, is free of guilt
and not dying of cancer; and going
past the news-stand, doesn’t see a headline
advertising torture. This is all
recommended reading, but in small doses.
 It shows you can avoid suffering, if you try. ﻿ 
Although she feeds me bread of bitterness, 
And sinks into my throat her tiger’s tooth, 
Stealing my breath of life, I will confess 
I love this cultured hell that tests my youth. 
Her vigor flows like tides into my blood, 
Giving me strength erect against her hate, 
Her bigness sweeps my being like a flood. 
Yet, as a rebel fronts a king in state, 
I stand within her walls with not a shred 
Of terror, malice, not a word of jeer. 
Darkly I gaze into the days ahead, 
And see her might and granite wonders there, 
Beneath the touch of Time’s unerring hand, 
Like priceless treasures sinking in the sand. 
You have forgotten it all.
 You have forgotten your name,
 where you lived, who you
 loved, why.
                       I am simply
 your nurse, terse and unlovely
 I point to things
 and remind you what they are:
 chair, book, daughter, soup.
 And when we are alone
 I tell you what lies
 in each direction: This way
 is death, and this way, after
 a longer walk, is death,
 and that way is death but you
 won’t see it
 until it is right
 in front of you.
               Once after
 your niece had been to visit you
 and I said something about
 how you must love her
 or she must love you
 or something useless like that,
 you gripped my forearm
 in your terrible swift hand
 and said, she is
 everything—you gave
 me a shake—everything
 to me.
                And then you fell
 back into the well. Deep
 in the well of everything. And I
 stand at the edge and call:
                   chair, book, daughter, soup. 
I have had enough. 
I gasp for breath. 
Every way ends, every road, 
every foot-path leads at last 
to the hill-crest— 
then you retrace your steps, 
or find the same slope on the other side, 
precipitate. 
I have had enough— 
border-pinks, clove-pinks, wax-lilies, 
herbs, sweet-cress. 
O for some sharp swish of a branch— 
there is no scent of resin 
in this place, 
no taste of bark, of coarse weeds, 
aromatic, astringent— 
only border on border of scented pinks. 
Have you seen fruit under cover 
that wanted light— 
pears wadded in cloth, 
protected from the frost, 
melons, almost ripe, 
smothered in straw? 
Why not let the pears cling 
to the empty branch? 
All your coaxing will only make 
a bitter fruit— 
let them cling, ripen of themselves, 
test their own worth, 
nipped, shrivelled by the frost, 
to fall at last but fair 
with a russet coat. 
Or the melon— 
let it bleach yellow 
in the winter light, 
even tart to the taste— 
it is better to taste of frost— 
the exquisite frost— 
than of wadding and of dead grass. 
For this beauty, 
beauty without strength, 
chokes out life. 
I want wind to break, 
scatter these pink-stalks, 
snap off their spiced heads, 
fling them about with dead leaves— 
spread the paths with twigs, 
limbs broken off, 
trail great pine branches, 
hurled from some far wood 
right across the melon-patch, 
break pear and quince— 
leave half-trees, torn, twisted 
but showing the fight was valiant. 
O to blot out this garden 
to forget, to find a new beauty 
in some terrible 
wind-tortured place. 
I ply with all the cunning of my art
This little thing, and with consummate care
I fashion it—so that when I depart,
Those who come after me shall find it fair
And beautiful. It must be free of flaws—
Pointing no laborings of weary hands;
And there must be no flouting of the laws
Of beauty—as the artist understands.
Through passion, yearnings infinite—yet dumb—
I lift you from the depths of my own mind
And gild you with my soul’s white heat to plumb
The souls of future men. I leave behind
This thing that in return this solace gives:
“He who creates true beauty ever lives.”
I heard a thousand blended notes, 
While in a grove I sate reclined, 
In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts 
Bring sad thoughts to the mind. 
To her fair works did Nature link 
The human soul that through me ran; 
And much it grieved my heart to think 
What man has made of man. 
Through primrose tufts, in that green bower, 
The periwinkle trailed its wreaths; 
And ’tis my faith that every flower 
Enjoys the air it breathes. 
The birds around me hopped and played, 
Their thoughts I cannot measure:— 
But the least motion which they made 
It seemed a thrill of pleasure. 
The budding twigs spread out their fan, 
To catch the breezy air; 
And I must think, do all I can, 
That there was pleasure there. 
If this belief from heaven be sent, 
If such be Nature’s holy plan, 
Have I not reason to lament 
What man has made of man? 
A storm and so a gift. 
       Its swift approach 
             lifts gravel from the road. 
A fence is flattened in 
       the course of   the storm’s 
             worse attempt at language — 
thunder’s umbrage. A tree 
       is torn apart, 
             blown upward through a bedroom 
window. A boy winnows 
       through the pile 
             of shards for the sharpest parts
from the blown-apart 
       glass. He has 
             a bag that holds found edges 
jagged as a stag’s
       horns or smooth as 
             a single pane smashed into 
smaller panes that he sticks 
       his hand into 
             to make blood web across 
his ache-less skin flexing 
       like fish gills 
             O-lipped for a scream
it cannot make.
       He wants to feel 
             what his friends have felt, 
the slant of fear on their faces 
       he could never 
             recreate, his body configured 
without pain. When his skin’s 
       pouting welts 
             don’t rake a whimper 
from his mouth, he runs 
       outside, arms up 
             for the storm, aluminum 
baseball bat held out 
       to the sky 
            until lightning with an electric 
tongue makes his viscera 
       luminescent; 
             the boy’s first word for pain
       is the light’s 
             new word for home. 
The doubt of future foes exiles my present joy, 
And wit me warns to shun such snares as threaten mine annoy; 
For falsehood now doth flow, and subjects’ faith doth ebb, 
Which should not be if reason ruled or wisdom weaved the web. 
But clouds of joys untried do cloak aspiring minds, 
Which turn to rain of late repent by changed course of winds. 
The top of hope supposed the root upreared shall be, 
And fruitless all their grafted guile, as shortly ye shall see. 
The dazzled eyes with pride, which great ambition blinds, 
Shall be unsealed by worthy wights whose foresight falsehood finds. 
The daughter of debate that discord aye doth sow 
Shall reap no gain where former rule still peace hath taught to know. 
No foreign banished wight shall anchor in this port; 
Our realm brooks not seditious sects, let them elsewhere resort. 
My rusty sword through rest shall first his edge employ 
To poll their tops that seek such change or gape for future joy. 
They think she lives alone
on the edge of town in a two-room house
where she moved when her husband died
at thirty-five of a gunshot wound
in the bed of another woman. The curandera
Back in a yard where ringers groove a ditch, 
These four in shirtsleeves congregate to pitch 
Dirt-burnished iron. With appraising eye, 
One sizes up a peg, hoists and lets fly—
A clang resounds as though a smith had struck 
Fire from a forge. His first blow, out of luck, 
Rattles in circles. Hitching up his face,
He swings, and weight once more inhabits space, 
Tumbles as gently as a new-laid egg.
Extended iron arms surround their peg
Like one come home to greet a long-lost brother. 
Shouts from one outpost. Mutters from the other.
Now changing sides, each withered pitcher moves 
As his considered dignity behooves
Down the worn path of earth where August flies 
And sheaves of air in warm distortions rise,
To stand ground, fling, kick dust with all the force 
Of shoes still hammered to a living horse.
I am wondering what became of all those tall abstractions 
that used to pose, robed and statuesque, in paintings 
and parade about on the pages of the Renaissance 
displaying their capital letters like license plates.
Truth cantering on a powerful horse,
Chastity, eyes downcast, fluttering with veils.
Each one was marble come to life, a thought in a coat, 
Courtesy bowing with one hand always extended,
Villainy sharpening an instrument behind a wall,
Reason with her crown and Constancy alert behind a helm. 
They are all retired now, consigned to a Florida for tropes. 
Justice is there standing by an open refrigerator.
Valor lies in bed listening to the rain.
Even Death has nothing to do but mend his cloak and hood, 
and all their props are locked away in a warehouse, 
hourglasses, globes, blindfolds and shackles.
Even if you called them back, there are no places left 
for them to go, no Garden of Mirth or Bower of Bliss. 
The Valley of Forgiveness is lined with condominiums 
and chain saws are howling in the Forest of Despair.
Here on the table near the window is a vase of peonies 
and next to it black binoculars and a money clip, 
exactly the kind of thing we now prefer,
objects that sit quietly on a line in lower case,
themselves and nothing more, a wheelbarrow,
an empty mailbox, a razor blade resting in a glass ashtray. 
As for the others, the great ideas on horseback
and the long-haired virtues in embroidered gowns,
it looks as though they have traveled down
that road you see on the final page of storybooks,
the one that winds up a green hillside and disappears
into an unseen valley where everyone must be fast asleep.
The glories of our blood and state
     Are shadows, not substantial things; 
There is no armour against Fate; 
     Death lays his icy hand on kings: 
               Sceptre and Crown 
               Must tumble down, 
And in the dust be equal made 
With the poor crooked scythe and spade.
Some men with swords may reap the field, 
     And plant fresh laurels where they kill: 
But their strong nerves at last must yield; 
     They tame but one another still: 
               Early or late 
               They stoop to fate, 
And must give up their murmuring breath 
When they, pale captives, creep to death.
The garlands wither on your brow;
     Then boast no more your mighty deeds!
Upon Death's purple altar now
      See where the victor-victim bleeds.
               Your heads must come
               To the cold tomb:
Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet and blossom in their dust. 
They flee from me that sometime did me seek
With naked foot, stalking in my chamber.
I have seen them gentle, tame, and meek,
That now are wild and do not remember
That sometime they put themself in danger
To take bread at my hand; and now they range,
Busily seeking with a continual change.
Thanked be fortune it hath been otherwise
Twenty times better; but once in special,
In thin array after a pleasant guise,
When her loose gown from her shoulders did fall,
And she me caught in her arms long and small;
Therewithall sweetly did me kiss
And softly said, “Dear heart, how like you this?”
It was no dream: I lay broad waking.
But all is turned thorough my gentleness
Into a strange fashion of forsaking;
And I have leave to go of her goodness,
And she also, to use newfangleness.
But since that I so kindly am served
I would fain know what she hath deserved. 
The time I’ve lost in wooing, 
In watching and pursuing 
The light, that lies 
In woman’s eyes, 
Has been my heart’s undoing. 
Though Wisdom oft has sought me, 
I scorn’d the lore she brought me, 
My only books 
Were woman’s looks, 
And folly’s all they’ve taught me. 
Her smile when Beauty granted, 
I hung with gaze enchanted, 
Like him the Sprite, 
Whom maids by night 
Oft meet in glen that’s haunted. 
Like him, too, Beauty won me, 
But while her eyes were on me, 
If once their ray 
Was turn’d away, 
Oh! winds could not outrun me. 
And are those follies going? 
And is my proud heart growing 
Too cold or wise 
For brilliant eyes 
Again to set it glowing? 
No, vain, alas! th’ endeavour 
From bonds so sweet to sever; 
Poor Wisdom’s chance 
Against a glance 
Is now as weak as ever. 
A brilliance takes up residence in flaws— 
a brilliance all the unchipped faces of design   
refuse. The wine collects its starlets 
at a lip's fault, sunlight where the nicked   
glass angles, and affection where the eye   
is least correctable, where arrows of 
unquivered light are lodged, where someone   
else's eyes have come to be concerned. 
For beauty's sake, assault and drive and burn   
the devil from the simply perfect sun.   
Demand a birthmark on the skin of love,   
a tremble in the touch, in come a cry,   
and let the silverware of nights be flecked,   
the moon pocked to distribute more or less   
indwelling alloys of its dim and shine   
by nip and tuck, by chance's dance of laws. 
The brightness drawn and quartered on a sheet,   
the moment cracked upon a bed, will last   
as if you soldered them with moon and flux.   
And break the bottle of the eye to see 
what lights are spun of accident and glass. 
The best job I had was moving a stone 
from one side of the road to the other. 
This required a permit which required 
a bribe. The bribe took all my salary. 
Yet because I hadn’t finished the job 
I had no salary, and to pay the bribe 
I took a job moving the stone 
the other way. Because the official 
wanted his bribe, he gave me a permit 
for the second job. When I pointed out 
that the work would be best completed 
if I did nothing, he complimented   
my brain and wrote a letter 
to my employer suggesting promotion 
on stationery bearing the wings 
of a raptor spread in flight 
over a mountain smaller than the bird. 
My boss, fearing my intelligence, 
paid me to sleep on the sofa 
and take lunch with the official 
who required a bribe to keep anything 
from being done. When I told my parents, 
they wrote my brother to come home 
from university to be slapped 
on the back of the head. Dutifully, 
he arrived and bowed to receive 
his instruction, at which point 
sense entered his body and he asked 
what I could do by way of a job. 
I pointed out there were stones 
everywhere trying not to move, 
all it took was a little gumption 
to be the man who didn’t move them. 
It was harder to explain the intricacies 
of not obtaining a permit to not 
do this. Just yesterday he got up 
at dawn and shaved, as if the lack 
of hair on his face has anything 
to do with the appearance of food 
on an empty table. 
His clumsy body is a golden fruit 
pendulous in the pear tree   
Blunt fingers among the multitudinous buds   
Adriatic blue the sky above and through 
the forking twigs 
Sun ruddying tree’s trunk, his trunk 
his massive head thick-nobbed with burnished curls   
tight-clenched in bud 
(Painting by Generalíc. Primitive.) 
I watch him prune with silent secateurs 
Boots in the crotch of branches shift their weight   
heavily as oxen in a stall 
Hear small inarticulate mews from his locked mouth   
a kitten in a box 
Pear clippings fall 
                            soundlessly on the ground 
Spring finches sing 
                            soundlessly in the leaves 
A stone. A stone in ears and on his tongue 
Through palm and fingertip he knows the tree’s   
quick springtime pulse 
Smells in its sap the sweet incipient pears 
Pale sunlight’s choppy water glistens on   
his mutely snipping blades 
and flags and scraps of blue 
above him make regatta of the day 
But when he sees his wife’s foreshortened shape   
sudden and silent in the grass below   
uptilt its face to him 
then air is kisses, kisses   
stone dissolves 
his locked throat finds a little door 
and through it feathered joy   
flies screaming like a jay 
Gather ye rose-buds while ye may,
   Old Time is still a-flying;
And this same flower that smiles today
   Tomorrow will be dying.
The glorious lamp of heaven, the sun,
   The higher he’s a-getting,
The sooner will his race be run,
   And nearer he’s to setting.
That age is best which is the first,
   When youth and blood are warmer;
But being spent, the worse, and worst
   Times still succeed the former.
Then be not coy, but use your time,
   And while ye may, go marry;
For having lost but once your prime,
   You may forever tarry. 
in Just- 
spring          when the world is mud- 
luscious the little 
lame balloonman 
whistles          far          and wee 
and eddieandbill come 
running from marbles and 
piracies and it's 
spring 
when the world is puddle-wonderful 
the queer 
old balloonman whistles 
far          and             wee 
and bettyandisbel come dancing 
from hop-scotch and jump-rope and 
it's 
and 
         the 
                  goat-footed 
balloonMan          whistles 
far 
wee 
I have studied the tight curls on the back of your neck   
moving away from me 
beyond anger or failure 
your face in the evening schools of longing 
through mornings of wish and ripen 
we were always saying goodbye 
in the blood in the bone over coffee 
before dashing for elevators going 
in opposite directions 
without goodbyes. 
Do not remember me as a bridge nor a roof   
as the maker of legends 
nor as a trap 
door to that world 
where black and white clericals 
hang on the edge of beauty in five oclock elevators   
twitching their shoulders to avoid other flesh   
and now 
there is someone to speak for them   
moving away from me into tomorrows   
morning of wish and ripen 
your goodbye is a promise of lightning   
in the last angels hand 
unwelcome and warning 
the sands have run out against us   
we were rewarded by journeys 
away from each other 
into desire 
into mornings alone 
where excuse and endurance mingle   
conceiving decision. 
Do not remember me 
as disaster 
nor as the keeper of secrets 
I am a fellow rider in the cattle cars 
watching 
you move slowly out of my bed   
saying we cannot waste time 
only ourselves. 
I married 
in the world’s black night 
for warmth 
                  if not repose. 
                  At the close— 
someone. 
I hid with him 
from the long range guns. 
                  We lay leg 
                  in the cupboard, head 
in closet. 
A slit of light 
at no bird dawn— 
                  Untaught 
                  I thought 
he drank 
too much. 
I say 
                  I married 
                  and lived unburied. 
I thought— 
What I want most is what I deeply fear:   
loss of self; yet here I stand, a “memsahib,”   
all decked out in wonder, and still a stranger   
amid the harvest, old gaffar at my side. 
Here’s a pandit preaching in the flower stall: 
he turns funeral wreaths into wheels of rapture.   
I must shrug off my notion of knowing anything   
of substance about the world, about the spirit.   
Sparrows dart between the columns like music.   
Huge pupae, bananas split their golden skins;   
flies moisten their hands in bands of dew.   
Lepers limp by on crutches, in slow motion.   
Where is there order in the world? None,   
none, I think—no order, only spirals of power.   
The pyramids of onion, guava, melon—all defy   
my reason: they shine like galaxy-driven planets. 
A balancing scale becomes a barge of plenty,   
a cornucopia endlessly filling up and emptying.   
The wages of sin are more sin: virtue’s wages,   
more virtue—and all such earnings, weightless.   
I’ve forgotten my errand; I float now through   
myself like a howl through a phantom mouth— 
the world’s an illusory marketplace where I   
must bargain hardest for what I hope I’m worth. 
Laugh, and the world laughs with you;
    Weep, and you weep alone;
For the sad old earth must borrow its mirth,
    But has trouble enough of its own.
Sing, and the hills will answer;
    Sigh, it is lost on the air;
The echoes bound to a joyful sound,
    But shrink from voicing care.
Rejoice, and men will seek you;
    Grieve, and they turn and go;
They want full measure of all your pleasure,
    But they do not need your woe.
Be glad, and your friends are many;
    Be sad, and you lose them all,—
There are none to decline your nectared wine,
    But alone you must drink life’s gall.
Feast, and your halls are crowded;
    Fast, and the world goes by.
Succeed and give, and it helps you live,
    But no man can help you die.
There is room in the halls of pleasure
    For a large and lordly train,
But one by one we must all file on
    Through the narrow aisles of pain. 
Crashing 
again—Basquiat 
sends fenders 
& letters headlong 
into each other 
the future. Fusion. 
AAAAAAAAAAA. 
Big Bang. The Big 
Apple, Atom's 
behind him— 
no sirens 
in sight. His career 
of careening 
since—at six— 
playing stickball 
a car stole 
his spleen. Blind 
sided. Move 
along folks—nothing 
to see here. Driven, 
does two Caddys 
colliding, biting 
the dust he's begun 
to snort. Hit 
& run. Red 
Cross—the pill-pale 
ambulance, inside 
out, he hitched 
to the hospital. 
Joy ride. Hot 
wired. O the rush 
before the wreck— 
each Cadillac, 
a Titanic, 
an iceberg that's met 
its match—cabin 
flooded 
like an engine, 
drawing even 
dark Shine 
from below deck. 
FLATS FIX. Chop 
shop. Body work 
while-u-wait. In situ 
the spleen 
or lien, anterior view—
When Eduard Raban, coming along the passage, walked into theopen doorway, he saw that it was raining. It was not raining much.                                        KAFKA, Wedding Preparations in the CountryThe concept is interesting: to see, as though reflected
In streaming windowpanes, the look of others through
Their own eyes. A digest of their correct impressions of
Their self-analytical attitudes overlaid by your
Ghostly transparent face. You in falbalas
Of some distant but not too distant era, the cosmetics,
The shoes perfectly pointed, drifting (how long you
Have been drifting; how long I have too for that matter)
Like a bottle-imp toward a surface which can never be
         approached,
Never pierced through into the timeless energy of a present
Which would have its own opinions on these matters,
Are an epistemological snapshot of the processes
That first mentioned your name at some crowded cocktail
Party long ago, and someone (not the person addressed)
Overheard it and carried that name around in his wallet
For years as the wallet crumbled and bills slid in
And out of it. I want that information very much today,
Can't have it, and this makes me angry.
I shall use my anger to build a bridge like that 
Of Avignon, on which people may dance for the feeling
Of dancing on a bridge. I shall at last see my complete face
Reflected not in the water but in the worn stone floor of my bridge.
I shall keep to myself.
I shall not repeat others' comments about me. 
“A equals X,” says Mister One.   
“A equals B,” says Mister Two.   
“A equals nothing under the sun   
But A,” says Mister Three. A few   
Applaud; some wipe their eyes;   
Some linger in the shade to see   
One and Two in neat disguise   
Decapitating Mister Three. 
“This age is not entirely bad.” 
It’s bad enough, God knows, but you   
Should know Elizabethans had   
Sweeneys and Mrs. Porters too.   
The past goes down and disappears,   
The present stumbles home to bed,   
The future stretches out in years 
That no one knows, and you’ll be dead. 
Then came the darker sooner,
came the later lower.
We were no longer a sweeter-here
happily-ever-after. We were after ever.
We were farther and further.
More was the word we used for harder.
Lost was our standard-bearer.
Our gods were fallen faster,
and fallen larger.
The day was duller, duller
was disaster. Our charge was error.
Instead of leader we had louder,
instead of lover, never. And over this river
broke the winter’s black weather. 
Darkness: the rain sluiced down; the mire was deep;   
It was past twelve on a mid-winter night, 
When peaceful folk in beds lay snug asleep;   
There, with much work to do before the light,   
We lugged our clay-sucked boots as best we might   
Along the trench; sometimes a bullet sang,   
And droning shells burst with a hollow bang;   
We were soaked, chilled and wretched, every one;   
Darkness; the distant wink of a huge gun. 
I turned in the black ditch, loathing the storm;   
A rocket fizzed and burned with blanching flare,   
And lit the face of what had been a form   
Floundering in mirk. He stood before me there;   
I say that He was Christ; stiff in the glare,   
And leaning forward from His burdening task,   
Both arms supporting it; His eyes on mine   
Stared from the woeful head that seemed a mask   
Of mortal pain in Hell’s unholy shine. 
No thorny crown, only a woollen cap 
He wore—an English soldier, white and strong,   
Who loved his time like any simple chap,   
Good days of work and sport and homely song;   
Now he has learned that nights are very long,   
And dawn a watching of the windowed sky.   
But to the end, unjudging, he’ll endure   
Horror and pain, not uncontent to die   
That Lancaster on Lune may stand secure. 
He faced me, reeling in his weariness, 
Shouldering his load of planks, so hard to bear.   
I say that He was Christ, who wrought to bless   
All groping things with freedom bright as air,   
And with His mercy washed and made them fair.   
Then the flame sank, and all grew black as pitch,   
While we began to struggle along the ditch;   
And someone flung his burden in the muck,   
Mumbling: ‘O Christ Almighty, now I’m stuck!’ 
December 1789When infant Reason first exerts her sway, 
And new-formed thoughts their earliest charms display; 
Then let the growing race employ your care 
Then guard their opening minds from Folly’s snare; 
Correct the rising passions of their youth, 
Teach them each serious, each important truth; 
Plant heavenly virtue in the tender breast, 
Destroy each vice that might its growth molest; 
Point out betimes the course they should pursue; 
Then with redoubled pleasure shall you view 
Their reason strengthen as their years increase, 
Their virtue ripen and their follies cease; 
Like corn sown early in the fertile soil, 
The richest harvest shall repay your toil. 
Sir, I am not a bird of prey: 
a Lady does not seize the day. 
I trust that brief Time will unfold 
our youth, before he makes us old. 
How could we two write lines of rhyme 
were we not fond of numbered Time 
and grateful to the vast and sweet 
trials his days will make us meet: 
The Grave's not just the body's curse; 
no skeleton can pen a verse! 
So while this numbered World we see, 
let's sweeten Time with poetry, 
and Time, in turn, may sweeten Love 
and give us time our love to prove. 
You've praised my eyes, forehead, breast: 
you've all our lives to praise the rest. 
The heat so peaked tonight
the moon can’t cool
a scum-mucked swimming
pool, or breeze
emerge to lift the frowsy
ruff of owls too hot
to hoot, (the mouse and brown
barn rat astute
enough to know to drop
and dash) while
on the bunched up,
corkscrewed sheets of cots
and slumped brass beds,
the fitful twist
and kink and plead to dream
a dream of air
as bitter cruel as winter
gale that scrapes and blows
and gusts the grate
to luff
the whitened ashes from the coal.
Here is where 
You can get nowhere 
Faster than ever
As you go under
Deeper and deeper
In the fertile smother
Of another acre
Like any other
You can’t peer over
And then another
And everywhere
You veer or hare
There you are
Farther and farther
Afield than before
But on you blunder
In the verdant meander
As if   the answer
To looking for cover
Were to bewilder
Your inner minotaur
And near and far were
Neither here nor there
And where you are
Is where you were 
I like to touch your tattoos in complete 
darkness, when I can’t see them. I’m sure of 
where they are, know by heart the neat 
lines of lightning pulsing just above 
your nipple, can find, as if by instinct, the blue 
swirls of water on your shoulder where a serpent 
twists, facing a dragon. When I pull you 
to me, taking you until we’re spent 
and quiet on the sheets, I love to kiss 
the pictures in your skin. They’ll last until 
you’re seared to ashes; whatever persists 
or turns to pain between us, they will still 
be there. Such permanence is terrifying. 
So I touch them in the dark; but touch them, trying. 
As kingfishers catch fire, dragonflies draw flame; 
As tumbled over rim in roundy wells 
Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell's 
Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name; 
Each mortal thing does one thing and the same: 
Deals out that being indoors each one dwells; 
Selves — goes itself; myself it speaks and spells, 
Crying Whát I dó is me: for that I came. 
I say móre: the just man justices; 
Keeps grace: thát keeps all his goings graces; 
Acts in God's eye what in God's eye he is — 
Chríst — for Christ plays in ten thousand places, 
Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his 
To the Father through the features of men's faces. 
The country I come from Is called the Midwest —Bob DylanI want to be doused 
in cheese 
& fried. I want 
to wander 
the aisles, my heart's 
supermarket stocked high 
as cholesterol. I want to die 
wearing a sweatsuit— 
I want to live 
forever in a Christmas sweater, 
a teddy bear nursing 
off the front. I want to write 
a check in the express lane. 
I want to scrape 
my driveway clean 
myself, early, before 
anyone's awake— 
that'll put em to shame— 
I want to see what the sun 
sees before it tells 
the snow to go. I want to be 
the only black person I know. 
I want to throw 
out my back & not 
complain about it. 
I wanta drive 
two blocks. Why walk— 
I want love, n stuff— 
I want to cut 
my sutures myself. 
I want to jog 
down to the river 
& make it my bed— 
I want to walk 
its muddy banks 
& make me a withdrawal. 
I tried jumping in, 
found it frozen— 
I'll go home, I guess, 
to my rooms where the moon 
changes & shines 
like television. 
The garments worn in flying dreams 
were fashioned there— 
overcoats that swooped like kites, 
scarves streaming like vapor trails, 
gowns ballooning into spinnakers. 
In a city like that one might sail 
through life led by a runaway hat. 
The young scattered in whatever directions 
their wild hair pointed, and gusting 
into one another, fell in love. 
At night, wind rippled saxophones 
that hung like windchimes in pawnshop 
windows, hooting through each horn 
so that the streets seemed haunted   
not by nighthawks, but by doves.   
Pinwheels whirled from steeples 
in place of crosses. At the pinnacles 
of public buildings, snagged underclothes— 
the only flag—flapped majestically. 
And when it came time to disappear 
one simply chose a thoroughfare 
devoid of memories, raised a collar, 
and turned his back on the wind. 
I closed my eyes and stepped 
into a swirl of scuttling leaves. 
Mother died last night,
Mother who never dies.
Winter was in the air,
many months away
but in the air nevertheless.
It was the tenth of May.
Hyacinth and apple blossom
bloomed in the back garden.
We could hear
Maria singing songs from Czechoslovakia —
How alone I am —
songs of that kind.
How alone I am,
no mother, no father —
We made it from the ground-up corn in the old back pasture. 
Pinched a scent of night jasmine billowing off the fence,   
popped it right in. 
That frog song wanting nothing but echo?   
We used that. 
Stirred it widely. Noticed the clouds while stirring. 
Called upon our ancient great aunts and their long slow eyes   
of summer. Dropped in their names.   
Added a mint leaf now and then   
to hearten the broth. Added a note of cheer and worry.   
Orange butterfly between the claps of thunder?   
Perfect. And once we had it, 
had smelled and tasted the fragrant syrup,   
placing the pan on a back burner for keeping,   
the sorrow lifted in small ways. 
We boiled down the lies in another pan till they disappeared. 
We washed that pan. 
September was when it began.
Locusts dying in the fields; our dogs
Silent, moving like shadows on a wall;
And strange worms crawling; flies of a kind
We had never seen before; huge vineyard moths;
Badgers and snakes, abandoning
Their holes in the field; the fruit gone rotten;
Queer fungi sprouting; the fields and woods
Covered with spiderwebs; black vapors
Rising from the earth - all these,
And more began that fall. Ravens flew round
The hospital in pairs. Where there was water,
We could hear the sound of beating clothes
All through the night. We could not count
All the miscarriages, the quarrels, the jealousies.
And one day in a field I saw
A swarm of frogs, swollen and hideous,
Hundreds upon hundreds, sitting on each other,
Huddled together, silent, ominous,
And heard the sound of rushing wind. 
A Picture from the LifeTo serve with love,And shed your blood,        Approved may be above,But here below(Example shew,)‘Tis dangerous to be good.--Lord OxfordDeep in a vale, a stranger now to arms,
Too poor to shine in courts, too proud to beg,
He, who once warred on Saratoga’s plains,
Sits musing o’er his scars, and wooden leg.
Remembering still the toil of former days,
To other hands he sees his earnings paid;--
They share the due reward—he feeds on praise.
Lost in the abyss of want, misfortune’s shade.
Far, far from domes where splendid tapers glare,
‘Tis his from dear bought peace no wealth to win,
Removed alike from courtly cringing ‘squires,
The great-man’s Levee, and the proud man’s grin.
Sold are those arms which once on Britons blazed,
When, flushed with conquest, to the charge they came;
That power repelled, and Freedom’s fabrick raised,
She leaves her soldier—famine and a name! 
The telephone never rings. Still
you pick it up, smile into the static,
the breath of those you’ve loved; long dead.
The leaf you pick from the fall
rises and dips away with every ridge.
Fingers stiff from time, you trace.
Staring off into a distance limned
by cataracts and other collected debris,
you have forgotten none of the long-ago joy
of an ice-cream truck and its summer song.
Between the paving stones;
between tea, a cup, and the sound
of you pouring;
between the time you woke that morning
and the time when the letter came,
a tired sorrow: like an old flagellant
able only to tease with a weak sting.
Riding the elevator all day,
floor after floor after floor,
each stop some small victory whittled
from the hard stone of death, you smile.
They used to write epics about moments like this. 
Now, in a breath, we’ll burst those gates of gold,   
   And ransack heaven before our moment fails.   
Now, in a breath, before we, too, grow old, 
   We’ll mount and sing and spread immortal sails. 
It is not time that makes eternity. 
   Love and an hour may quite out-span the years,   
And give us more to hear and more to see   
   Than life can wash away with all its tears. 
Dear, when we part, at last, that sunset sky 
   Shall not be touched with deeper hues than this;   
But we shall ride the lightning ere we die 
   And seize our brief infinitude of bliss, 
With time to spare for all that heaven can tell,   
While eyes meet eyes, and look their last farewell. 
In the long, sleepless watches of the night, 
   A gentle face — the face of one long dead — 
   Looks at me from the wall, where round its head 
   The night-lamp casts a halo of pale light. 
Here in this room she died; and soul more white 
   Never through martyrdom of fire was led 
   To its repose; nor can in books be read 
   The legend of a life more benedight. 
There is a mountain in the distant West 
   That, sun-defying, in its deep ravines 
   Displays a cross of snow upon its side. 
Such is the cross I wear upon my breast 
   These eighteen years, through all the changing scenes 
   And seasons, changeless since the day she died. 
What the scale tells you is how much the earth 
has missed you, body, how it wants you back 
again after you leave it to go forth 
into the light. Do you remember how 
earth hardly noticed you then? Others would rock 
you in their arms, warm in the flow 
that fed you, coaxed you upright. Then earth began 
to claim you with spots and fevers, began to lick 
at you with a bruised knee, a bloody shin, 
and finally to stoke you, body, drumming 
intimate coded messages through music 
you danced to unawares, there in your dreaming 
and your poems and your obedient blood. 
Body, how useful you became, how lucky, 
heavy with news and breakage, rich, and sad, 
sometimes, imagining that greedy zero 
you must have been, that promising empty sack 
of possibilities, never-to-come tomorrow. 
But look at you now, body, soft old shoe 
that love wears when it’s stirring, look down, look 
how earth wants what you weigh, needs what you know. 
Is the ocean really inside seashells                      or is it all in your mind?                                                —PICHON DE LA ONCEBehold and soak like a sponge.   
I have discovered that the island of Puerto Rico   
is the ears of Saru-Saru, a poet reputed to have lived   
in Atlantis. On the day that the water kissed and   
embraced and filled all the holes of that giant   
missing link, this bard’s curiosity was the greatest   
for he kept swimming and listening for causes.   
He picked up rocks before they sank and blew   
wind viciously into them. Finally he blew so hard   
into a rock that he busted his ear drums; angry,   
he recited poems as he tried turning into a bird   
to fly to green Brazil. His left ear opened up   
like a canal and a rock lodged in it. Rock attracts   
rock and many rocks attached to this rock. It got   
like a rocket. His ear stayed with it in a horizontal   
position. Finally after so many generations he got   
to hear what he most wanted: the sounds made by flowers   
as they stretched into the light. Behold, I have   
discovered that the island of Puerto Rico is the   
ears of Saru-Saru. 
It’s in the perilous boughs of the tree   
out of blue sky    the wind   
sings loudest surrounding me. 
And solitude,   a wild solitude 
’s reveald,   fearfully,   high     I’d climb   
into the shaking uncertainties, 
part out of longing,   part     daring my self, 
part to see that 
widening of the world,   part 
to find my own, my secret 
hiding sense and place, where from afar   
all voices and scenes come back 
—the barking of a dog,   autumnal burnings, 
far calls,   close calls—   the boy I was 
calls out to me 
here the man where I am   “Look! 
I’ve been where you 
most fear to be.” 
In Abraham Lincoln’s city, 
Where they remember his lawyer’s shingle, 
The place where they brought him 
Wrapped in battle flags, 
Wrapped in the smoke of memories 
From Tallahassee to the Yukon, 
The place now where the shaft of his tomb 
Points white against the blue prairie dome, 
In Abraham Lincoln’s city ... I saw knucks 
In the window of Mister Fischman’s second-hand store 
On Second Street. 
I went in and asked, “How much?” 
“Thirty cents apiece,” answered Mister Fischman. 
And taking a box of new ones off a shelf 
He filled anew the box in the showcase 
And said incidentally, most casually 
And incidentally: 
“I sell a carload a month of these.” 
I slipped my fingers into a set of knucks, 
Cast-iron knucks molded in a foundry pattern, 
And there came to me a set of thoughts like these: 
Mister Fischman is for Abe and the “malice to none” stuff, 
And the street car strikers and the strike-breakers, 
And the sluggers, gunmen, detectives, policemen, 
Judges, utility heads, newspapers, priests, lawyers, 
They are all for Abe and the “malice to none” stuff. 
I started for the door. 
“Maybe you want a lighter pair,” 
Came Mister Fischman’s voice. 
I opened the door ... and the voice again: 
“You are a funny customer.” 
Wrapped in the smoke of memories, 
This is the place they brought him, 
This is Abraham Lincoln's home town.
Now sleeps the crimson petal, now the white; 
Nor waves the cypress in the palace walk; 
Nor winks the gold fin in the porphyry font. 
The firefly wakens; waken thou with me. 
   Now droops the milk-white peacock like a ghost, 
And like a ghost she glimmers on to me. 
   Now lies the Earth all Danaë to the stars, 
And all thy heart lies open unto me. 
   Now slides the silent meteor on, and leaves 
A shining furrow, as thy thoughts in me. 
   Now folds the lily all her sweetness up, 
And slips into the bosom of the lake. 
So fold thyself, my dearest, thou, and slip 
Into my bosom and be lost in me. 
On the fleet streams, the Sun, that late arose, 
   In amber radiance plays; the tall young grass 
   No foot hath bruised; clear morning, as I pass, 
   Breathes the pure gale, that on the blossom blows; 
And, as with gold yon green hill’s summit glows, 
   The lake inlays the vale with molten glass: 
   Now is the year’s soft youth, yet one, alas! 
   Cheers not as it was wont; impending woes 
Weigh on my heart; the joys, that once were mine, 
   Spring leads not back; and those that yet remain 
   Fade while she blooms. Each hour more lovely shine 
Her crystal beams, and feed her floral train, 
   But oh with pale, and warring fires, decline 
   Those eyes, whose light my filial hopes sustain. 
Piping down the valleys wild 
Piping songs of pleasant glee 
On a cloud I saw a child. 
And he laughing said to me. 
Pipe a song about a Lamb; 
So I piped with merry chear, 
Piper pipe that song again— 
So I piped, he wept to hear. 
Drop thy pipe thy happy pipe 
Sing thy songs of happy chear, 
So I sung the same again 
While he wept with joy to hear 
Piper sit thee down and write 
In a book that all may read— 
So he vanish'd from my sight. 
And I pluck'd a hollow reed. 
And I made a rural pen, 
And I stain'd the water clear, 
And I wrote my happy songs 
Every child may joy to hear 
I remember a square of New York’s Hudson River glinting between warehouses. 
Difficult to approach the water below the pier 
Swirling, covered with oil the ship at the pier 
A steel wall: tons in the water, 
Width. 
The hand for holding, 
Legs for walking, 
The eye sees! It floods in on us from here to Jersey tangled in the grey bright air! 
Become the realm of nations. 
My love, my love, 
We are endangered 
Totally at last. Look 
Anywhere to the sight’s limit: space   
Which is viviparous: 
Place of the mind 
And eye. Which can destroy us,   
Re-arrange itself, assert 
Its own stone chain reaction. 
I 
honey people murder mercy U.S.A.   
the milkland turn to monsters teach   
to kill to violate pull down destroy   
the weakly freedom growing fruit   
from being born 
America 
tomorrow yesterday rip rape   
exacerbate despoil disfigure   
crazy running threat the   
deadly thrall 
appall belief dispel 
the wildlife burn the breast   
the onward tongue 
the outward hand 
deform the normal rainy   
riot sunshine shelter wreck 
of darkness derogate 
delimit blank 
explode deprive 
assassinate and batten up 
like bullets fatten up 
the raving greed 
reactivate a springtime 
terrorizing 
death by men by more 
than you or I can 
STOP 
       II 
They sleep who know a regulated place 
or pulse or tide or changing sky 
according to some universal   
stage direction obvious   
like shorewashed shells 
we share an afternoon of mourning   
in between no next predictable 
except for wild reversal hearse rehearsal   
bleach the blacklong lunging 
ritual of fright insanity and more 
deplorable abortion 
more and 
more 
THERE 's little joy in life for me, 
      And little terror in the grave; 
I 've lived the parting hour to see 
      Of one I would have died to save. 
Calmly to watch the failing breath, 
      Wishing each sigh might be the last; 
Longing to see the shade of death 
      O'er those belovèd features cast. 
The cloud, the stillness that must part 
      The darling of my life from me; 
And then to thank God from my heart, 
      To thank Him well and fervently; 
Although I knew that we had lost 
      The hope and glory of our life; 
And now, benighted, tempest-tossed, 
      Must bear alone the weary strife. 
Inside the veins there are navies setting forth,   
Tiny explosions at the waterlines, 
And seagulls weaving in the wind of the salty blood. 
It is the morning. The country has slept the whole winter. 
Window seats were covered with fur skins, the yard was full 
Of stiff dogs, and hands that clumsily held heavy books. 
Now we wake, and rise from bed, and eat breakfast!   
Shouts rise from the harbor of the blood, 
Mist, and masts rising, the knock of wooden tackle in the sunlight. 
Now we sing, and do tiny dances on the kitchen floor.   
Our whole body is like a harbor at dawn;   
We know that our master has left us for the day. 
“The cure for loneliness is solitude.”  —Marianne MooreHopper never painted this, but here   
on a snaky path his vision lingers: 
three white tombs, robots with glassed-in faces   
and meters for eyes, grim mouths, flat noses, 
lean forward on a platform, like strangers   
with identical frowns scanning a blur, 
far off, that might be their train. 
Gas tanks broken for decades face Parson’s 
smithy, planked shut now. Both relics must stay.   
The pumps have roots in gas pools, and the smithy 
stores memories of hammers forging scythes   
to cut spartina grass for dry salt hay. 
The tanks have the remove of local clammers   
who sink buckets and stand, never in pairs, 
but one and one and one, blank-eyed, alone,   
more serene than lonely. Today a woman 
rakes in the shallows, then bends to receive   
last rays in shimmering water, her long shadow 
knifing the bay. She slides into her truck 
to watch the sky flame over sand flats, a hawk’s 
wind arabesque, an island risen, brown   
Atlantis, at low tide; she probes the shoreline 
and beyond grassy dunes for where the land   
might slope off into night. Hers is no common 
emptiness, but a vaster silence filled   
with terns’ cries, an abundant solitude. 
Nearby, the three dry gas pumps, worn   
survivors of clam-digging generations, 
are luminous, and have an exile’s grandeur   
that says: In perfect solitude, there’s fire. 
One day I approached the vessels 
and wanted to drive on, the road ablaze 
with dogwood in full bloom, but the contraptions   
outdazzled the road’s white, even outshone 
a bleached shirt flapping alone 
on a laundry line, arms pointed down. 
High noon. Three urns, ironic in their outcast   
dignity—as though, like some pine chests, 
they might be prized in disuse—cast rays, 
spun leaf—covered numbers, clanked, then wheezed 
and stopped again. Shadows cut the road   
before I drove off into the dark woods. 
Nothing is so beautiful as Spring –          
   When weeds, in wheels, shoot long and lovely and lush;          
   Thrush’s eggs look little low heavens, and thrush          
Through the echoing timber does so rinse and wring          
The ear, it strikes like lightnings to hear him sing; 
   The glassy peartree leaves and blooms, they brush          
   The descending blue; that blue is all in a rush          
With richness; the racing lambs too have fair their fling.          
What is all this juice and all this joy?          
   A strain of the earth’s sweet being in the beginning 
In Eden garden. – Have, get, before it cloy,          
   Before it cloud, Christ, lord, and sour with sinning,          
Innocent mind and Mayday in girl and boy,          
   Most, O maid’s child, thy choice and worthy the winning.          
I felt a Funeral, in my Brain, 
And Mourners to and fro
Kept treading - treading - till it seemed 
That Sense was breaking through - 
And when they all were seated, 
A Service, like a Drum -
Kept beating - beating - till I thought 
My mind was going numb - 
And then I heard them lift a Box
And creak across my Soul 
With those same Boots of Lead, again,
Then Space - began to toll,
As all the Heavens were a Bell, 
And Being, but an Ear, 
And I, and Silence, some strange Race, 
Wrecked, solitary, here -
And then a Plank in Reason, broke, 
And I dropped down, and down - 
And hit a World, at every plunge, 
And Finished knowing - then - 
The wind blows east, the wind blows west, 
And the frost falls and the rain: 
A weary heart went thankful to rest, 
And must rise to toil again, ’gain, 
And must rise to toil again. 
And there comes good luck and bad; 
The thriftiest man is the cheerfulest; 
’Tis a thriftless thing to be sad, sad, 
’Tis a thriftless thing to be sad. 
The wind blows east, the wind blows west; 
Ye shall know a tree by its fruit: 
This world, they say, is worst to the best;— 
But a dastard has evil to boot, boot, 
But a dastard has evil to boot. 
What skills it to mourn or to talk? 
A journey I have, and far ere I rest; 
I must bundle my wallets and walk, walk, 
I must bundle my wallets and walk. 
The wind does blow as it lists alway; 
Canst thou change this world to thy mind? 
The world will wander its own wise way; 
I also will wander mine, mine, 
I also will wander mine. 
When the forsaken city starts to burn,
after the men and children have fled,
stand still, silent as prey, and slowly turn
back. Behold the curse. Stay and mourn 
the collapsing doorways, the unbroken bread 
in the forsaken city starting to burn.
Don’t flinch. Don’t join in. 
Resist the righteous scurry and instead
stand still, silent as prey. Slowly turn
your thoughts away from escape: the iron
gates unlatched, the responsibilities shed.
surrender to your calling, show concern 
for those who remain. Come to a dead
standstill. Silent as prey, slowly turn
into something essential. Learn
the names of the fallen. Refuse to run ahead
when the forsaken city starts to burn.
Stand still and silent. Pray. Return. 
I lived in the first century of world wars. 
Most mornings I would be more or less insane,
The newspapers would arrive with their careless stories, 
The news would pour out of various devices 
Interrupted by attempts to sell products to the unseen. 
I would call my friends on other devices; 
They would be more or less mad for similar reasons. 
Slowly I would get to pen and paper, 
Make my poems for others unseen and unborn. 
In the day I would be reminded of those men and women, 
Brave, setting up signals across vast distances, 
Considering a nameless way of living, of almost unimagined values. 
As the lights darkened, as the lights of night brightened, 
We would try to imagine them, try to find each other, 
To construct peace, to make love, to reconcile 
Waking with sleeping, ourselves with each other, 
Ourselves with ourselves. We would try by any means 
To reach the limits of ourselves, to reach beyond ourselves, 
To let go the means, to wake. 
I lived in the first century of these wars.
It is not bad.  Let them play. 
Let the guns bark and the bombing-plane 
Speak his prodigious blasphemies. 
It is not bad, it is high time, 
Stark violence is still the sire of all the world’s values. 
What but the wolf’s tooth whittled so fine 
The fleet limbs of the antelope? 
What but fear winged the birds, and hunger 
Jewelled with such eyes the great goshawk’s head? 
Violence has been the sire of all the world’s values. 
Who would remember Helen’s face 
Lacking the terrible halo of spears? 
Who formed Christ but Herod and Caesar, 
The cruel and bloody victories of Caesar? 
Violence, the bloody sire of all the world’s values. 
Never weep, let them play, 
Old violence is not too old to beget new values. 
Jeremiah Dickson was a true-blue American, 
For he was a little boy who understood America, for he felt that he must 
Think about everything; because that’s all there is to think about,   
Knowing immediately the intimacy of truth and comedy,   
Knowing intuitively how a sense of humor was a necessity   
For one and for all who live in America. Thus, natively, and   
Naturally when on an April Sunday in an ice cream parlor Jeremiah   
Was requested to choose between a chocolate sundae and a banana split 
He answered unhesitatingly, having no need to think of it 
Being a true-blue American, determined to continue as he began:   
Rejecting the either-or of Kierkegaard, and many another European;   
Refusing to accept alternatives, refusing to believe the choice of between; 
Rejecting selection; denying dilemma; electing absolute affirmation: knowing 
         in his breast 
                  The infinite and the gold 
                  Of the endless frontier, the deathless West. 
“Both: I will have them both!” declared this true-blue American   
In Cambridge, Massachusetts, on an April Sunday, instructed 
         By the great department stores, by the Five-and-Ten, 
Taught by Christmas, by the circus, by the vulgarity and grandeur of 
         Niagara Falls and the Grand Canyon, 
Tutored by the grandeur, vulgarity, and infinite appetite gratified and   
         Shining in the darkness, of the light 
On Saturdays at the double bills of the moon pictures, 
The consummation of the advertisements of the imagination of the light 
Which is as it was—the infinite belief in infinite hope—of Columbus,   
         Barnum, Edison, and Jeremiah Dickson. 
Such a book must contain—   
it always does!—a disclaimer. 
I make no such. For here   
I have collected all the best— 
the lily from the field among them,   
forget-me-nots and mint weed,   
a rose for whoever expected it,   
and a buttercup for the children   
to make their noses yellow. 
Here is clover for the lucky 
to roll in, and milkweed to clatter,   
a daisy for one judgment, 
and a violet for when he loves you   
or if he loves you not and why not.   
Those who sniff and say no, 
These are the wrong ones (and   
there always are such people!)— 
let them go elsewhere, and quickly! 
For you and I, who have made it this far,   
are made happy by occasions 
requiring orchids, or queenly arrangements   
and even a bird-of-paradise, 
but happier still by the flowers of   
circumstance, cattails of our youth,   
field grass and bulrush. I have included   
the devil’s paintbrush 
but only as a peacock among barn fowl. 
I wonder, by my troth, what thou and I 
Did, till we loved? Were we not weaned till then? 
But sucked on country pleasures, childishly? 
Or snorted we in the Seven Sleepers’ den? 
’Twas so; but this, all pleasures fancies be. 
If ever any beauty I did see, 
Which I desired, and got, ’twas but a dream of thee. 
And now good-morrow to our waking souls, 
Which watch not one another out of fear; 
For love, all love of other sights controls, 
And makes one little room an everywhere. 
Let sea-discoverers to new worlds have gone, 
Let maps to other, worlds on worlds have shown, 
Let us possess one world, each hath one, and is one. 
My face in thine eye, thine in mine appears, 
And true plain hearts do in the faces rest; 
Where can we find two better hemispheres, 
Without sharp north, without declining west? 
Whatever dies, was not mixed equally; 
If our two loves be one, or, thou and I 
Love so alike, that none do slacken, none can die. 
I am hoping
to hang your head
on my wall
in shame—
the slightest taxidermy
thrills me. Fish
forever leaping
on the living-room wall—
paperweights made
from skulls
of small animals.
I want to wear
your smile on my sleeve
& break
your heart like a horse
or its leg. Weeks of being
bucked off, then
all at once, you're mine—
Put me down.
I want to call you thine
to tattoo mercy
along my knuckles. I assassin
Those 
various sounds, consistently indistinct, like intermingled echoes 
   struck from thin glasses successively at random— 
       the inflection disguised: your hair, the tails of two 
   fighting-cocks head to head in stone— 
       like sculptured scimitars repeating the curve of your    
               ears in reverse order:    
                                                                        your eyes, 
             flowers of ice and snow 
sown by tearing winds on the cordage of disabled ships: your 
       raised hand 
an ambiguous signature: your cheeks, those rosettes 
   of blood on the stone floors of French châteaux, 
with regard to which the guides are so affirmative— 
          your other hand 
a bundle of lances all alike, partly hid by emeralds from Persia 
    and the fractional magnificence of Florentine 
       goldwork—a collection of little objects— 
sapphires set with emeralds, and pearls with a moonstone, made fine 
   with enamel in gray, yellow, and dragonfly blue; 
      a lemon, a pear 
and three bunches of grapes, tied with silver: your dress, a magnificent square 
cathedral tower of uniform 
   and at the same time diverse appearance—a 
species of vertical vineyard, rustling in the storm 
   of conventional opinion—are they weapons or scalpels? 
       Whetted to brilliance 
by the hard majesty of that sophistication which is superior to opportunity, 
these things are rich instruments with which to experiment. 
    But why dissect destiny with instruments 
    more highly specialized than the components of destiny 
            itself? 
That night your great guns, unawares, 
Shook all our coffins as we lay, 
And broke the chancel window-squares, 
We thought it was the Judgment-day 
And sat upright. While drearisome 
Arose the howl of wakened hounds: 
The mouse let fall the altar-crumb, 
The worms drew back into the mounds, 
The glebe cow drooled. Till God called, “No; 
It’s gunnery practice out at sea 
Just as before you went below; 
The world is as it used to be: 
“All nations striving strong to make 
Red war yet redder. Mad as hatters 
They do no more for Christés sake 
Than you who are helpless in such matters. 
“That this is not the judgment-hour 
For some of them’s a blessed thing, 
For if it were they’d have to scour 
Hell’s floor for so much threatening.... 
“Ha, ha. It will be warmer when 
I blow the trumpet (if indeed 
I ever do; for you are men, 
And rest eternal sorely need).” 
So down we lay again. “I wonder, 
Will the world ever saner be,” 
Said one, “than when He sent us under 
In our indifferent century!” 
And many a skeleton shook his head. 
“Instead of preaching forty year,” 
My neighbour Parson Thirdly said, 
“I wish I had stuck to pipes and beer.” 
Again the guns disturbed the hour, 
Roaring their readiness to avenge, 
As far inland as Stourton Tower, 
And Camelot, and starlit Stonehenge. 
There are many people who come back
After the doctor has smoothed the sheet
Around their body
And left the room to make his call.
They die but they live.
They are called the dead who lived through their deaths,
And among my people
They are considered wise and honest.
They float out of their bodies
And light on the ceiling like a moth,
Watching the efforts of everyone around them.
The voices and the images of the living
Fade away.
A roar sucks them under
The wheels of a darkness without pain.
Off in the distance
There is someone
Like a signalman swinging a lantern.
The light grows, a white flower.
It becomes very intense, like music.
They see the faces of those they loved,
The truly dead who speak kindly.
They see their father sitting in a field.
The harvest is over and his cane chair is mended.
There is a towel around his neck,
The odor of bay rum.
Then they see their mother
Standing behind him with a pair of shears.
The wind is blowing.
She is cutting his hair.
The dead have told these stories
To the living. 
There's a place between two stands of trees where the grass grows uphill 
and the old revolutionary road breaks off into shadows 
near a meeting-house abandoned by the persecuted 
who disappeared into those shadows. 
I've walked there picking mushrooms at the edge of dread, but don't be fooled 
this isn't a Russian poem, this is not somewhere else but here, 
our country moving closer to its own truth and dread, 
its own ways of making people disappear. 
I won't tell you where the place is, the dark mesh of the woods 
meeting the unmarked strip of light— 
ghost-ridden crossroads, leafmold paradise: 
I know already who wants to buy it, sell it, make it disappear. 
And I won't tell you where it is, so why do I tell you 
anything? Because you still listen, because in times like these 
to have you listen at all, it's necessary 
to talk about trees. 
Remember when you love, from that same hour 
Your peace you put into your lover’s power; 
From that same hour from him you laws receive, 
And as he shall ordain, you joy, or grieve, 
Hope, fear, laugh, weep; Reason aloof does stand, 
Disabled both to act, and to command. 
Oh cruel fetters! rather wish to feel 
On your soft limbs, the galling weight of steel; 
Rather to bloody wounds oppose your breast. 
No ill, by which the body can be pressed 
You will so sensible a torment find 
As shackles on your captived mind. 
The mind from heaven its high descent did draw, 
And brooks uneasily any other law 
Than what from Reason dictated shall be. 
Reason, a kind of innate deity, 
Which only can adapt to ev’ry soul 
A yoke so fit and light, that the control 
All liberty excels; so sweet a sway, 
The same ’tis to be happy, and obey; 
Commands so wise, and with rewards so dressed, 
That the according soul replies “I’m blessed.” 
The moon now rises to her absolute rule, 
And the husbandman and hunter 
Acknowledge her for their mistress. 
Asters and golden reign in the fields 
And the life everlasting withers not. 
The fields are reaped and shorn of their pride 
But an inward verdure still crowns them; 
The thistle scatters its down on the pool 
And yellow leaves clothe the river— 
And nought disturbs the serious life of men. 
But behind the sheaves and under the sod 
There lurks a ripe fruit which the reapers have not gathered, 
The true harvest of the year—the boreal fruit 
Which it bears forever, 
With fondness annually watering and maturing it. 
But man never severs the stalk 
Which bears this palatable fruit. 
The world is full of mostly invisible things,
And there is no way but putting the mind’s eye,
Or its nose, in a book, to find them out,
Things like the square root of Everest
Or how many times Byron goes into Texas,
Or whether the law of the excluded middle
Applies west of the Rockies. For these
And the like reasons, you have to go to school
And study books and listen to what you are told,
And sometimes try to remember. Though I don’t know
What you will do with the mean annual rainfall
On Plato’s Republic, or the calorie content
Of the Diet of Worms, such things are said to be 
Good for you, and you will have to learn them
In order to become one of the grown-ups
Who sees invisible things neither steadily nor whole,
But keeps gravely the grand confusion of the world
Under his hat, which is where it belongs,
And teaches small children to do this in their turn. 
"Had he and I but met 
            By some old ancient inn, 
We should have sat us down to wet 
            Right many a nipperkin! 
            "But ranged as infantry, 
            And staring face to face, 
I shot at him as he at me, 
            And killed him in his place. 
            "I shot him dead because — 
            Because he was my foe, 
Just so: my foe of course he was; 
            That's clear enough; although 
            "He thought he'd 'list, perhaps, 
            Off-hand like — just as I — 
Was out of work — had sold his traps — 
            No other reason why. 
            "Yes; quaint and curious war is! 
            You shoot a fellow down 
You'd treat if met where any bar is, 
            Or help to half-a-crown." 
The hounds, you know them all by name. 
You fostered them from purblind whelps 
At their dam’s teats, and you have come 
To know the music of their yelps: 
High-strung Anthee, the brindled bitch, 
The blue-tick coated Philomel, 
And freckled Chloe, who would fetch 
A pretty price if you would sell— 
All fleet of foot, and swift to scent, 
Inexorable once on the track, 
Like angry words you might have meant, 
But do not mean, and can’t take back. 
There was a time when you would brag 
How they would bay and rend apart 
The hopeless belling from a stag. 
You falter now for the foundered hart. 
Desires you nursed of a winter night— 
Did you know then why you bred them— 
Whose needling milk-teeth used to bite 
The master’s hand that leashed and fed them? 
Late in November, on a single night
 Not even near to freezing, the ginkgo trees
 That stand along the walk drop all their leaves
 In one consent, and neither to rain nor to wind
 But as though to time alone: the golden and green
 Leaves litter the lawn today, that yesterday
 Had spread aloft their fluttering fans of light.
 What signal from the stars? What senses took it in?
 What in those wooden motives so decided
 To strike their leaves, to down their leaves,
 Rebellion or surrender? and if this 
 Can happen thus, what race shall be exempt?
 What use to learn the lessons taught by time.
 If a star at any time may tell us: Now. 
Everything contains some   
silence. Noise gets 
its zest from the 
small shark's-tooth 
shaped fragments 
of rest angled 
in it. An hour   
of city holds maybe   
a minute of these   
remnants of a time   
when silence reigned,   
compact and dangerous   
as a shark. Sometimes   
a bit of a tail   
or fin can still   
be sensed in parks. 
Children under, say, ten, shouldn't know 
that the universe is ever-expanding,   
inexorably pushing into the vacuum, galaxies 
swallowed by galaxies, whole 
solar systems collapsing, all of it 
acted out in silence. At ten we are still learning 
the rules of cartoon animation, 
that if a man draws a door on a rock 
only he can pass through it.   
Anyone else who tries 
will crash into the rock. Ten-year-olds 
should stick with burning houses, car wrecks,   
ships going down—earthbound, tangible 
disasters, arenas 
where they can be heroes. You can run 
back into a burning house, sinking ships 
have lifeboats, the trucks will come 
with their ladders, if you jump 
you will be saved. A child 
places her hand on the roof of a schoolbus,   
& drives across a city of sand. She knows 
the exact spot it will skid, at which point 
the bridge will give, who will swim to safety 
& who will be pulled under by sharks. She will learn 
that if a man runs off the edge of a cliff 
he will not fall 
until he notices his mistake. 
The baby sleeps.
Sunlight plays upon my lap, through doily leaves a black lab comes,
a scotty goes, the day wears on, the baby wakes.
The good birds sing,
invisible or seldom seen, in hidden kingdoms, grateful for the in-
between. The baby sleeps. Elsewhere the Queen rolls by
on gusts of cheer — 
ladies wave and bless her reign. The baby frets. The baby feeds.
The end of lunch, a daytime moon. The leaves
are lightly tinkered with.
It’s spring? No, autumn? Afternoon? We’ve sat so long, we’ve walked
so far. The woods in shade, the woods in sun, the singing birds,
the noble trees.
The child is grown. The child is gone. The black lab comes,
his circuit done. His mistress coils his scarlet lead. 
Written in the Autumn of the Year of the Horse 2002I have run on middle fingernail through Eolithic morning,
I have thundered down the coach road with the Revolution’s warning.
I have carried countless errant knights who never found the grail.
I have strained before the caissons I have moved the nation’s mail.
I’ve made knights of lowly tribesmen and kings from ranks of peons
I have given pride and arrogance to riding men for eons.
I have grazed among the lodges and the tepees and the yurts.
I have felt the sting of driving whips, lashes, spurs and quirts.
      I am roguish – I am flighty – I am inbred – I am lowly.
      I’m a nightmare – I am wild – I am the horse.
      I am gallant and exalted – I am stately – I am noble.
      I’m impressive – I am grand – I am the horse.
I have suffered gross indignities from users and from winners,
I have felt the hand of kindness from the losers and the sinners.
I have given for the cruel hand and given for the kind. 
Heaved a sigh at Appomattox when surrender had been signed.
I can be as tough as hardened steel – as fragile as a flower.
I know not my endurance and I know not my own power.
I have died with heart exploded ’neath the cheering in the stands -
Calmly stood beneath the hanging noose of vigilante bands.
      I have traveled under conqueror and underneath the beaten.
      I have never chosen sides – I am the horse.
      The world is but a player’s stage – my roles have numbered many.
      Under blue or under gray – I am the horse.
So I’ll run on middle fingernail until the curtain closes,
And I will win your triple crowns and I will wear your roses.
Toward you who took my freedom I’ve no malice or remorse.
I’ll endure – This Is My Year – I am the Horse!
I am weary of the working, 
   Weary of the long day’s heat; 
To thy comfortable bosom, 
   Wilt thou take me, spirit sweet? 
Weary of the long, blind struggle 
   For a pathway bright and high,— 
Weary of the dimly dying 
   Hopes that never quite all die. 
Weary searching a bad cipher 
   For a good that must be meant; 
Discontent with being weary,— 
   Weary with my discontent. 
I am weary of the trusting 
   Where my trusts but torments prove; 
Wilt thou keep faith with me? wilt thou 
   Be my true and tender love? 
I am weary drifting, driving 
   Like a helmless bark at sea; 
Kindly, comfortable spirit, 
   Wilt thou give thyself to me? 
Give thy birds to sing me sonnets? 
   Give thy winds my cheeks to kiss? 
And thy mossy rocks to stand for 
   The memorials of our bliss? 
I in reverence will hold thee, 
   Never vexed with jealous ills, 
Though thy wild and wimpling waters 
   Wind about a thousand hills. 
The fountains mingle with the river 
   And the rivers with the ocean, 
The winds of heaven mix for ever 
   With a sweet emotion; 
Nothing in the world is single; 
   All things by a law divine 
In one spirit meet and mingle. 
   Why not I with thine?— 
See the mountains kiss high heaven 
   And the waves clasp one another; 
No sister-flower would be forgiven 
   If it disdained its brother; 
And the sunlight clasps the earth 
   And the moonbeams kiss the sea: 
What is all this sweet work worth 
   If thou kiss not me? 
It hangs on its
                stem like a plum
at the edge of a
               darkening thicket.
It’s swelling and
               blushing and ripe
and I reach out a
               hand to pick it
but flesh moves
               slow through time
and evening
               comes on fast
and just when I
               think my fingers
might seize that
               sweetness at last
the gentlest of
               breezes rises
and the plum lets
               go of   the stem.
And now it’s my
               fingers ripening
and evening that’s
               reaching for them. 
The music was already turning sad, 
      those fresh-faced voices singing in a round 
            the lie that time could set its needle back 
and play from the beginning. Had you lived 
      to eighty, as you’d wished, who knows?—you might   
            have broken from the circle of that past 
more ours than yours. Never even sure   
      which was the truest color for your hair 
            (it changed with each photographer), we claimed 
you for ourselves; called you John and named   
      the day you left us (spun out like a reel— 
            the last broadcast to prove you’d lived at all) 
an end to hope itself. It isn’t true, 
      and worse, does you no justice if we call 
            your death the death of anything but you. 
II 
It put you in the headlines once again: 
      years after you’d left the band, you joined   
            another—of those whose lives, in breaking, link 
all memory with their end. The studio   
      of history can tamper with you now, 
            as if there’d always been a single track 
chance traveled on, and your discordant voice   
      had led us to the final violence. 
            Yet like the times when I, a star-crossed fan, 
had catalogued your favorite foods, your views   
      on monarchy and war, and gaily clipped 
            your quips and daily antics from the news, 
I keep a loving record of your death.   
      All the evidence is in—of what, 
            and to what end, it’s hard to figure out, 
riddles you might have beat into a song.   
      A younger face of yours, a cover shot, 
            peered from all the newsstands as if proof 
of some noteworthy thing you’d newly done. 
When despair for the world grows in me 
and I wake in the night at the least sound 
in fear of what my life and my children’s lives may be, 
I go and lie down where the wood drake 
rests in his beauty on the water, and the great heron feeds. 
I come into the peace of wild things 
who do not tax their lives with forethought 
of grief. I come into the presence of still water. 
And I feel above me the day-blind stars 
waiting with their light. For a time 
I rest in the grace of the world, and am free. 
Gotta love us brown girls, munching on fat, swinging blue hips, 
decked out in shells and splashes, Lawdie, bringing them woo hips. 
As the jukebox teases, watch my sistas throat the heartbreak, 
inhaling bassline, cracking backbone and singing thru hips. 
Like something boneless, we glide silent, seeping 'tween floorboards, 
wrapping around the hims, and ooh wee, clinging like glue hips. 
Engines grinding, rotating, smokin', gotta pull back some. 
Natural minds are lost at the mere sight of ringing true hips. 
Gotta love us girls, just struttin' down Manhattan streets 
killing the menfolk with a dose of that stinging view. Hips. 
Crying 'bout getting old—Patricia, you need to get up off 
what God gave you. Say a prayer and start slinging. Cue hips. 
The sea is calm tonight. 
The tide is full, the moon lies fair 
Upon the straits; on the French coast the light 
Gleams and is gone; the cliffs of England stand, 
Glimmering and vast, out in the tranquil bay. 
Come to the window, sweet is the night-air! 
Only, from the long line of spray 
Where the sea meets the moon-blanched land, 
Listen! you hear the grating roar 
Of pebbles which the waves draw back, and fling, 
At their return, up the high strand, 
Begin, and cease, and then again begin, 
With tremulous cadence slow, and bring 
The eternal note of sadness in. 
Sophocles long ago 
Heard it on the Ægean, and it brought 
Into his mind the turbid ebb and flow 
Of human misery; we 
Find also in the sound a thought, 
Hearing it by this distant northern sea. 
The Sea of Faith 
Was once, too, at the full, and round earth’s shore 
Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furled. 
But now I only hear 
Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar, 
Retreating, to the breath 
Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear 
And naked shingles of the world. 
Ah, love, let us be true 
To one another! for the world, which seems 
To lie before us like a land of dreams, 
So various, so beautiful, so new, 
Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light, 
Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain; 
And we are here as on a darkling plain 
Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight, 
Where ignorant armies clash by night. 
1. 
If that someone who’s me yet not me yet who judges me is always with me,    
as he is, shouldn’t he have been there when I said so long ago that thing I said?   
If he who rakes me with such not trivial shame for minor sins now were there then,   
shouldn’t he have warned me he’d even now devastate me for my unpardonable affront?   
I’m a child then, yet already I’ve composed this conscience-beast, who harries me:   
is there anything else I can say with certainty about who I was, except that I, that he,   
could already draw from infinitesimal transgressions complex chords of remorse,   
and orchestrate ever undiminishing retribution from the hapless rest of myself?   
The son of some friends of my parents has died, and my parents, paying their call,   
take me along, and I’m sent out with the dead boy’s brother and some others to play.   
We’re joking around, and some words come to my mind, which to my amazement are said.   
How do you know when you can laugh when somebody dies, your brother dies? 
is what’s said, and the others go quiet, the backyard goes quiet, everyone stares,   
and I want to know now why that someone in me who’s me yet not me let me say it.   
Shouldn’t he have told me the contrition cycle would from then be ever upon me,   
it didn’t matter that I’d really only wanted to know how grief ends, and when?   
I could hear the boy’s mother sobbing inside, then stopping, sobbing then stopping.   
Was the end of her grief already there? Had her someone in her told her it would end?   
Was her someone in her kinder to her, not tearing at her, as mine did, still does, me,   
for guessing grief someday ends? Is that why her sobbing stopped sometimes?   
She didn’t laugh, though, or I never heard her. How do you know when you can laugh? 
Why couldn’t someone have been there in me not just to accuse me, but to explain?   
The kids were playing again, I was playing, I didn’t hear anything more from inside.   
The way now sometimes what’s in me is silent, too, and sometimes, though never really, forgets. 
Try to praise the mutilated world.
Remember June's long days,
and wild strawberries, drops of rosé wine.
The nettles that methodically overgrow
the abandoned homesteads of exiles.
You must praise the mutilated world.
You watched the stylish yachts and ships;
one of them had a long trip ahead of it,
while salty oblivion awaited others.
You've seen the refugees going nowhere,
you've heard the executioners sing joyfully.
You should praise the mutilated world.
Remember the moments when we were together
in a white room and the curtain fluttered.
Return in thought to the concert where music flared.
You gathered acorns in the park in autumn
and leaves eddied over the earth's scars.
Praise the mutilated world
and the gray feather a thrush lost,
and the gentle light that strays and vanishes
and returns.
Wake to find everything black
what was white, all the vice
versa—white maids on TV, black
sitcoms that star white dwarfs
cute as pearl buttons. Black Presidents,
Black Houses. White horse
candidates. All bleach burns
clothes black. Drive roads
white as you are, white songs
on the radio stolen by black bands
like secret pancake recipes, white back-up
singers, ball-players & boxers all
white as tar. Feathers on chickens
dark as everything, boiling in the pot
that called the kettle honky. Even
whites of the eye turn dark, pupils
clear & changing as a cat's.
Is this what we've wanted
& waited for? to see snow
covering everything black
as Christmas, dark pages written
white upon? All our eclipses bright,
dark stars shooting across pale
sky, glowing like ash in fire, shower
every skin. Only money keeps
green, still grows & burns like grass
under dark daylight. 
I loved him not; and yet, now he is gone, 
         I feel I am alone. 
I check’d him while he spoke; yet, could he speak, 
         Alas! I would not check. 
For reasons not to love him once I sought, 
         And wearied all my thought 
To vex myself and him: I now would give 
         My love could he but live 
Who lately lived for me, and, when he found 
         ’Twas vain, in holy ground 
He hid his face amid the shades of death. 
         I waste for him my breath 
Who wasted his for me! but mine returns, 
         And this lorn bosom burns 
With stifling heat, heaving it up in sleep, 
         And waking me to weep 
Tears that had melted his soft heart: for years 
         Wept he as bitter tears. 
Merciful God! such was his latest prayer, 
         These may she never share. 
Quieter is his breath, his breast more cold, 
         Than daisies in the mould, 
Where children spell, athwart the churchyard gate, 
         His name and life’s brief date. 
Pray for him, gentle souls, whoe’er you be, 
         And oh! pray too for me! 
Among the many lives you’ll never lead,
consider that of the wolverine, for whom avalanche
is opportunity, who makes a festival
of frozen marrow from the femur of an elk,
who wears the crooked North Star like an amulet
of teeth. In the game of which animal
would you return as, today I’m thinking
snowshoe hare, a scuffle in the underbrush,
one giant leap. You never see them
coming and going, only the crosshairs
of their having passed, ascending the ridge, lost
or not lost in succession forests giving way
to open meadow where deep snow
lingers and finally relents, uncovering
acres of lily — glacier yellow, avalanche
white — daylight restaking its earthly claim.
Every season swallows someone — 
Granite Mountain with its blunderbuss
gullies, Tatoosh a lash on the tongue,
those climbers caught if not unawares
then perfectly hapless, not thinking of riding
that snowstorm to the summit, not thinking
wolverine fever in the shivering blood,
not thinking steelhead cutthroat rainbow
or the languid river that will carry them out. 
I leant upon a coppice gate 
      When Frost was spectre-grey, 
And Winter's dregs made desolate 
      The weakening eye of day. 
The tangled bine-stems scored the sky 
      Like strings of broken lyres, 
And all mankind that haunted nigh 
      Had sought their household fires. 
The land's sharp features seemed to be 
      The Century's corpse outleant, 
His crypt the cloudy canopy, 
      The wind his death-lament. 
The ancient pulse of germ and birth 
      Was shrunken hard and dry, 
And every spirit upon earth 
      Seemed fervourless as I. 
At once a voice arose among 
      The bleak twigs overhead 
In a full-hearted evensong 
      Of joy illimited; 
An aged thrush, frail, gaunt, and small, 
      In blast-beruffled plume, 
Had chosen thus to fling his soul 
      Upon the growing gloom. 
So little cause for carolings 
      Of such ecstatic sound 
Was written on terrestrial things 
      Afar or nigh around, 
That I could think there trembled through 
      His happy good-night air 
Some blessed Hope, whereof he knew 
      And I was unaware. 
I collect them now, it seems. Like 
sea-shells or old 
thimbles. One for 
Father. One for
Mother. Two for my sweet brothers. 
Odd how little 
they require of 
me. Unlike the
ones they were sent in memory 
of. No sudden 
shrilling of the 
phone. No harried
midnight flights. Only a little 
water now and 
then. Scant food and 
light. See how I’ve
brought them all together here in 
this shaded space 
beyond the stairs. 
Even when they
thirst, they summon me with nothing 
more than a soft, 
indifferent furl- 
ing of their leaves.﻿ 
I have sown beside all waters in my day. 
I planted deep, within my heart the fear 
that wind or fowl would take the grain away. 
I planted safe against this stark, lean year.   
I scattered seed enough to plant the land 
in rows from Canada to Mexico 
but for my reaping only what the hand 
can hold at once is all that I can show. 
Yet what I sowed and what the orchard yields 
my brother's sons are gathering stalk and root; 
small wonder then my children glean in fields 
they have not sown, and feed on bitter fruit. 
Distrust this season breeds
in me whole
blue worlds, am second
to leafy nouns,
pinned back darkening lip
of the night,
untrustworthy sidewalk glazed
and sleeping there,
peachy trees, a line drawn from one
brow of a star down
and planted, each pillow
little shimmer, little wilt startled
from out the arranging field
moonlit pale behind
no foxes, in me finding the fragrant
new crisis, not dead still
where I love you in feast
and pledge, worlds rolling first
on crookedly
and on. 
The darkness crumbles away.
It is the same old druid Time as ever, 
Only a live thing leaps my hand,
A queer sardonic rat,
As I pull the parapet’s poppy
To stick behind my ear.
Droll rat, they would shoot you if they knew 
Your cosmopolitan sympathies.
Now you have touched this English hand 
You will do the same to a German 
Soon, no doubt, if it be your pleasure 
To cross the sleeping green between. 
It seems you inwardly grin as you pass 
Strong eyes, fine limbs, haughty athletes, 
Less chanced than you for life,
Bonds to the whims of murder,
Sprawled in the bowels of the earth, 
The torn fields of France.
What do you see in our eyes
At the shrieking iron and flame
Hurled through still heavens?
What quaver—what heart aghast?
Poppies whose roots are in man’s veins
Drop, and are ever dropping; 
But mine in my ear is safe—
Just a little white with the dust. 
We’re writing our names with sizzles of light 
to celebrate the fourth. I use the loops of cursive, 
make a big B like the sloping hills on the west side 
of the lake. The rest, little a, r, one small b, 
spit and fizz as they scratch the night. On the side 
of the shack where we bought them, a handmade sign: 
Trailer Full of Sparkles Ahead, and I imagine crazy 
chrysanthemums, wheels of fire, glitter bouncing 
off metal walls. Here, we keep tracing in tiny 
pyrotechnics the letters we were given at birth, 
branding them on the air. And though my mother’s 
name has been erased now, I write it, too: 
a big swooping I, a hissing s, an a that sighs 
like her last breath, and then I ring 
belle, belle, belle in the sulphuric smoky dark. 
Come when the nights are bright with stars 
Or come when the moon is mellow; 
Come when the sun his golden bars 
Drops on the hay-field yellow. 
Come in the twilight soft and gray, 
Come in the night or come in the day, 
Come, O love, whene’er you may, 
And you are welcome, welcome. 
You are sweet, O Love, dear Love, 
You are soft as the nesting dove. 
Come to my heart and bring it to rest 
As the bird flies home to its welcome nest. 
Come when my heart is full of grief 
Or when my heart is merry; 
Come with the falling of the leaf 
Or with the redd’ning cherry. 
Come when the year’s first blossom blows, 
Come when the summer gleams and glows, 
Come with the winter’s drifting snows, 
The snail moves like a 
Hovercraft, held up by a 
Rubber cushion of itself, 
Sharing its secret 
With the hedgehog. The hedgehog 
Shares its secret with no one. 
We say, Hedgehog, come out 
Of yourself and we will love you. 
We mean no harm. We want 
Only to listen to what 
You have to say. We want 
Your answers to our questions. 
The hedgehog gives nothing 
Away, keeping itself to itself. 
We wonder what a hedgehog 
Has to hide, why it so distrusts. 
We forget the god 
Under this crown of thorns. 
We forget that never again 
Will a god trust in the world. 
for Philip HobsbaumLate August, given heavy rain and sun 
For a full week, the blackberries would ripen. 
At first, just one, a glossy purple clot 
Among others, red, green, hard as a knot. 
You ate that first one and its flesh was sweet 
Like thickened wine: summer's blood was in it 
Leaving stains upon the tongue and lust for 
Picking. Then red ones inked up and that hunger 
Sent us out with milk cans, pea tins, jam-pots 
Where briars scratched and wet grass bleached our boots. 
Round hayfields, cornfields and potato-drills 
We trekked and picked until the cans were full, 
Until the tinkling bottom had been covered 
With green ones, and on top big dark blobs burned 
Like a plate of eyes. Our hands were peppered 
With thorn pricks, our palms sticky as Bluebeard's. 
We hoarded the fresh berries in the byre. 
But when the bath was filled we found a fur, 
A rat-grey fungus, glutting on our cache. 
The juice was stinking too. Once off the bush 
The fruit fermented, the sweet flesh would turn sour. 
I always felt like crying. It wasn't fair 
That all the lovely canfuls smelt of rot. 
Each year I hoped they'd keep, knew they would not. 
Among twenty snowy mountains,   
The only moving thing   
Was the eye of the blackbird.   
 II 
I was of three minds,   
Like a tree   
In which there are three blackbirds.   
 III 
The blackbird whirled in the autumn winds.   
It was a small part of the pantomime.   
 IV 
A man and a woman   
Are one.   
A man and a woman and a blackbird   
 V 
I do not know which to prefer,   
The beauty of inflections   
Or the beauty of innuendoes,   
The blackbird whistling   
Or just after.   
 VI 
Icicles filled the long window   
With barbaric glass.   
The shadow of the blackbird   
Crossed it, to and fro.   
The mood   
Traced in the shadow   
An indecipherable cause.   
 VII 
O thin men of Haddam,   
Why do you imagine golden birds?   
Do you not see how the blackbird   
Walks around the feet   
Of the women about you?   
 VIII 
I know noble accents   
And lucid, inescapable rhythms;   
But I know, too,   
That the blackbird is involved   
In what I know.   
 IX 
When the blackbird flew out of sight,   
It marked the edge   
Of one of many circles.   
 X 
At the sight of blackbirds   
Flying in a green light,   
Even the bawds of euphony   
Would cry out sharply.   
 XI 
He rode over Connecticut   
In a glass coach.   
Once, a fear pierced him,   
In that he mistook   
The shadow of his equipage   
For blackbirds.   
 XII 
The river is moving.   
The blackbird must be flying.   
 XIII 
It was evening all afternoon.   
It was snowing   
And it was going to snow.   
The blackbird sat   
In the cedar-limbs. 
I am a feather on the bright sky 
I am the blue horse that runs in the plain 
I am the fish that rolls, shining, in the water 
I am the shadow that follows a child 
I am the evening light, the lustre of meadows 
I am an eagle playing with the wind 
I am a cluster of bright beads 
I am the farthest star 
I am the cold of dawn 
I am the roaring of the rain 
I am the glitter on the crust of the snow 
I am the long track of the moon in a lake 
I am a flame of four colors 
I am a deer standing away in the dusk 
I am a field of sumac and the pomme blanche 
I am an angle of geese in the winter sky 
I am the hunger of a young wolf 
I am the whole dream of these things 
You see, I am alive, I am alive 
I stand in good relation to the earth 
I stand in good relation to the gods 
I stand in good relation to all that is beautiful 
I stand in good relation to the daughter of Tsen-tainte 
Toe after toe, a snowing flesh, 
a gold of lemon, root and rind, 
she sifts in sunlight down the stairs 
with nothing on. Nor on her mind. 
We spy beneath the banister 
a constant thresh of thigh on thigh; 
her lips imprint the swinging air 
that parts to let her parts go by. 
    
One-woman waterfall, she wears 
her slow descent like a long cape 
and pausing on the final stair, 
collects her motions into shape. 
Each day I go into the fields
to see what is growing
and what remains to be done.
It is always the same thing: nothing
is growing, everything needs to be done.
Plow, harrow, disc, water, pray
till my bones ache and hands rub
blood-raw with honest labor—
all that grows is the slow
intransigent intensity of need.
I have sown my seed on soil
guaranteed by poverty to fail.
But I don’t complain—except
to passersby who ask me why
I work such barren earth.
They would not understand me
if I stooped to lift a rock
and hold it like a child, or laughed,
or told them it is their poverty
I labor to relieve. For them,
I complain. A farmer of dreams
knows how to pretend. A farmer of dreams
knows what it means to be patient.
Each day I go into the fields. 
Be perfect, make it otherwise.
 Yesterday is torn in shreds.
 Lightning’s thousand sulfur eyes
 Rip apart the breathing beds.
 Hear bones crack and pulverize.
 Doom creeps in on rubber treads.
 Countless overwrought housewives, 
 Minds unraveling like threads,
 Try lipstick shades to tranquilize
 Fears of age and general dreads.
 Sit tight, be perfect, swat the spies,
 Don’t take faucets for fountainheads.
 Drink tasty antidotes. Otherwise
 You and the werewolf: newlyweds. 
   At the midnight in the silence of the sleep-time,
      When you set your fancies free,
Will they pass to where—by death, fools think, imprisoned—
Low he lies who once so loved you, whom you loved so,
             —Pity me?
   Oh to love so, be so loved, yet so mistaken!
      What had I on earth to do
With the slothful, with the mawkish, the unmanly?
Like the aimless, helpless, hopeless, did I drivel
             —Being—who?
   One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
      Never doubted clouds would break,
Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
             Sleep to wake.
   No, at noonday in the bustle of man's work-time
      Greet the unseen with a cheer!
Bid him forward, breast and back as either should be,
"Strive and thrive!" cry "Speed,—fight on, fare ever
             There as here!"
I like the generosity of numbers.
The way, for example,
they are willing to count
anything or anyone:
two pickles, one door to the room,
eight dancers dressed as swans.
I like the domesticity of addition—
add two cups of milk and stir—
In the end she just wanted the house
               and a horse not much more what
       if  he didn’t own the house or worse
                       not even a horse how do we
separate the things from a man the man from
                the things is a man still the same
        without his reins here it rains every fifteen
                        minutes it would be foolish to
marry a man without an umbrella did
                Cinderella really love the prince or
        just the prints on the curtains in the
                        ballroom once I went window-
shopping but I didn’t want a window when
                do you know it’s time to get a new
        man one who can win more things at the
                        fair I already have four stuffed
pandas from the fair I won fair and square
                is it time to be less square to wear
        something more revealing in North and
                        South
Did you sneeze? 
Yes, I rid myself of the imposter inside me. 
Did you iron your shirt? 
Yes, I used the steam of mother's hate. 
Did you wash your hands? 
Yes, I learned my hygiene from a raccoon. 
I prayed on my knees, and my knees answered with pain. 
I gargled. I polished my shoes until I saw who I was. 
I inflated my résumé by employing my middle name. 
I walked to my interview, early, 
The sun like a ring on an electric stove. 
I patted my hair when I entered the wind of a revolving door. 
The guard said, For a guy like you, it's the 19th floor. 
The economy was up. Flags whipped in every city plaza 
In America. This I saw for myself as I rode the elevator, 
Empty because everyone had a job but me. 
Did you clean your ears? 
Yes, I heard my fate in the drinking fountain's idiotic drivel.
Did you slice a banana into your daily mush? 
I added a pinch of salt, two raisins to sweeten my breath. 
Did you remember your pen? 
I remembered my fingers when the elevator opened. 
I shook hands that dripped like a dirty sea. 
I found a chair and desk. My name tag said my name. 
Through the glass ceiling, I saw the heavy rumps of CEOs. 
Outside my window, the sun was a burning stove, 
All of us pushing papers 
To keep it going. 
My heart is bleeding. It bleeds upward and fills
my mouth up with salt. It bleeds because of a city in ruins,
the chair still warm from sister's body,
because it will all be irreproducible. My heart
bleeds because of baby bear not finding mama bear and it bleeds
to the tips of my fingers like I painted my nails Crimson.
Sometimes my heart bleeds so much I am a raisin.
It bleeds until I am a quivering ragged clot, bleeds at the ending
with the heroine and her sunken cancer eyes, at the ending
with the plaintive flute over smoke-choked killing fields. I'm bleeding
a river of blood right now and it's wearing a culvert in me for the blood. My heart
rises up in me, becomes the cork of me and I choke on it. I am bleeding
for you and for me and for the tiny babies and the IED-blown
leg. It bleeds because I'm made that way, all filled up with blood,
my sloppy heart a sponge filled with blood to squezze onto 
any circumstance. Because it is mine, it will always bleed.
My heart bled today. It bled onto the streets
and the steps of city hall. It bled in the pizza parlor with the useless jukebox.
I've got so much blood to give inside and outside of any milieu.
Even for a bad zoning decision, I'll bleed so much you'll be bleeding,
all of us bleeding in and out like it's breathing,
or kissing, and because it is righteous and terrible and red.
TWINKLE, twinkle, little star, 
How I wonder what you are ! 
Up above the world so high, 
Like a diamond in the sky. 
When the blazing sun is gone, 
When he nothing shines upon, 
Then you show your little light, 
Twinkle, twinkle, all the night. 
Then the trav'ller in the dark, 
Thanks you for your tiny spark, 
He could not see which way to go, 
If you did not twinkle so. 
In the dark blue sky you keep, 
And often thro' my curtains peep, 
For you never shut your eye, 
Till the sun is in the sky. 
'Tis your bright and tiny spark, 
Lights the trav'ller in the dark : 
Tho' I know not what you are, 
Twinkle, twinkle, little star. 
As virtuous men pass mildly away, 
   And whisper to their souls to go, 
Whilst some of their sad friends do say 
   The breath goes now, and some say, No: 
So let us melt, and make no noise, 
   No tear-floods, nor sigh-tempests move; 
'Twere profanation of our joys 
   To tell the laity our love. 
Moving of th' earth brings harms and fears, 
   Men reckon what it did, and meant; 
But trepidation of the spheres, 
   Though greater far, is innocent. 
Dull sublunary lovers' love 
   (Whose soul is sense) cannot admit 
Absence, because it doth remove 
   Those things which elemented it. 
But we by a love so much refined, 
   That our selves know not what it is, 
Inter-assured of the mind, 
   Care less, eyes, lips, and hands to miss. 
Our two souls therefore, which are one, 
   Though I must go, endure not yet 
A breach, but an expansion, 
   Like gold to airy thinness beat. 
If they be two, they are two so 
   As stiff twin compasses are two; 
Thy soul, the fixed foot, makes no show 
   To move, but doth, if the other do. 
And though it in the center sit, 
   Yet when the other far doth roam, 
It leans and hearkens after it, 
   And grows erect, as that comes home. 
Such wilt thou be to me, who must, 
   Like th' other foot, obliquely run; 
Thy firmness makes my circle just, 
   And makes me end where I begun. 
Nights, by the light of whatever would burn:   
tallow, tinder and the silken rope 
of wick that burns slow, slow 
we wove the baskets from the long gold strands   
of wheat that were another silk: worm soul 
spun the one, yellow seed in the dark soil, the other. 
The fields lay fallow, swollen with frost,   
expectant winter. Mud clung to the edges 
of our gowns; we had hung back like shadows 
on the walls of trees and watched. In the little circles   
that our tapers threw, murdered men rose red   
in their clanging armor, muttered 
words that bled through the bars 
of iron masks: the lord 
who sold us to the glory fields, lied.
I must go down to the seas again, to the lonely sea and the sky,
And all I ask is a tall ship and a star to steer her by;
And the wheel’s kick and the wind’s song and the white sail’s shaking,
And a grey mist on the sea’s face, and a grey dawn breaking.
I must go down to the seas again, for the call of the running tide
Is a wild call and a clear call that may not be denied; 
And all I ask is a windy day with the white clouds flying,
And the flung spray and the blown spume, and the sea-gulls crying.
I must go down to the seas again, to the vagrant gypsy life,
To the gull’s way and the whale’s way where the wind’s like a whetted knife;
And all I ask is a merry yarn from a laughing fellow-rover,
And quiet sleep and a sweet dream when the long trick’s over. 
Use me
Abuse me
          Turn wheels of ﬁre
          on manhole hotheads
Sing me
Sour me
          Secrete dark matter’s sheen
          on our smarting skin
Rise and shine
In puddle shallows
          under every Meryl Cheryl Caleb Syd
          somnambulists and sleepyheads
Wake us
Speak to us
          Bless what you’ve nurtured in your pits
          the rats voles roaches and all outlivers
          of your obscene ethic and politics
Crawl on us 
Fall on us
          you elevations that break and vein
          down to sulfuric ﬁber-optic wrecks
            through drill-bit dirt to bedrock
Beat our brows
Flee our sorrows
          Sleep tight with your ultraviolets
          righteous mica and drainage seeps
                               your gorgeous color-chart container ships
                               and cab-top numbers squinting in the mist
My father, rather a quiet man,
told a story only the one time,
if even then—he had so little
need, it seemed, of being understood.
Intervals of years, his silences!
Late in his life he recalled for us
that when he was sixteen, his papa
entrusted to him a wagonload
of hogs, which he was to deliver
to the train depot, a half-day’s ride
from home, over a hilly dirt road.
Lightly he held the reins, light his heart,
the old horses, as ever, willing.
In town at noon he heard the station-
master say the train had been delayed,
would not arrive until that evening.
The boy could only wait. At home they’d
wait for him and worry and would place
the kerosene lamp in the window.
Thus the day had turned to dusk before
he turned about the empty wagon,
took his weary horses through the cloud
of fireflies that was the little town.
In all his years he’d never seen those
lights—he thought of this, he said, until
he and his milk-white horses came down
the last moonlit hill to home, drawn as
from a distance toward a single flame. 
I have heard the horn of Roland goldly screaming 
In the petty Pyrenees of the inner ear 
And seen the frightful Saracens of fear 
Pour from the passes, fought them, brave in dreaming. 
But waked, and heard my own voice tinly screaming 
In the whorled and whirling valleys of the ear, 
And beat the savage bed back in my fear, 
And crawled, unheroed, down those cliffs of dreaming. 
    II 
I have ridden with Hannibal in the mountain dusk, 
Watching the drivers yell the doomed and gray 
Elephants over the trumpeting Alps, gone gay 
With snow vivid on peaks, on the ivory tusk. 
But waked, and found myself in the vivid dusk 
Plunging the deep and icy floor, gone gray 
With bellowing shapes of morning, and the gay 
Sunshaft through me like an ivory tusk. 
    III 
I have smiled on the platform, hearing without shame 
The crowd scream out my praise, I, the new star, 
Handsome, disparaging my bloody scar, 
Yet turning its curve to the light when they called my name. 
But waked, and the empty window sneered my name, 
The sky bled, drop by golden drop, each star 
The curved moon glittered like a sickle's scar, 
The night wind called with its gentle voices: Shame! 
    IV 
I have climbed the secret balcony, on the floor 
Lain with the lady, drunk the passionate wine, 
Found, beneath the green, lewd-smelling vine, 
Love open to me like a waiting door. 
But waked to delirious shadows on the door, 
Found, while my stomach staggered with sour wine, 
Green drunkenness creep on me like a vine, 
And puked my passion on the bathroom floor. 
    V 
I have run with Boone and watched the Indian pillage 
The log house, fought, arrow in leg, and hobbled 
Over the painful ground while the warrior gobbled 
Wild-turkey cry, but escaped to save the village. 
But waked, and walked the city, vicious village, 
Fought through the traffic where the wild horn gobbled, 
Bruised on the bumper, turned toward home, hobbled 
Back, myself the house my neighbors pillage. 
    VI 
I have lain in bed and felt my body taken 
Like water utterly possessing sand, 
Surrounding, seething, soothing, as a hand 
Comforts and clasps the hand that it has shaken. 
But waked, and found that I was wholly shaken 
By you, as the wave surrounds and seethes the sand, 
That your whole body was a reaching hand 
And my whole body the hand that yours had taken. 
There, Robert, you have kill'd that fly  ,
And should you thousand ages try
The life you've taken to supply,
      You could not do it.
You surely must have been devoid
Of thought and sense, to have destroy'd
A thing which no way you annoy'd 
      You'll one day rue it.
Twas but a fly perhaps you'll say,
That's born in April, dies in May;
That does but just learn to display
      His wings one minute,
And in the next is vanish'd quite.
A bird devours it in his flight 
Or come a cold blast in the night,
      There's no breath in it.
The bird but seeks his proper food 
And Providence, whose power endu'd
That fly with life, when it thinks good,
      May justly take it.
But you have no excuses for't 
A life by Nature made so short,
Less reason is that you for sport
      Should shorter make it.
A fly a little thing you rate 
But, Robert do not estimate
A creature's pain by small or great;
      The greatest being
Can have but fibres, nerves, and flesh,
And these the smallest ones possess,
Although their frame and structure less
      Escape our seeing.
The last full moon of February
stalks the fields; barbed wire casts a shadow.
Rising slowly, a beam moved toward the west
stealthily changing position
until now, in the small hours, across the snow
it advances on my pillow
to wake me, not rudely like the sun
but with the cocked gun of silence.
I am alone in a vast room
where a vain woman once slept.
The moon, in pale buckskins, crouches
on guard beside her bed.
Slowly the light wanes, the snow will melt
and all the fences thrum in the spring breeze
but not until that sleeper, trapped
in my body, turns and turns. 
  
When you put on the mask the thunder starts.
Through the nostril’s orange you can smell
the far hope of rain. Up in the Nilgiris,
glisten of eucalyptus, drip of pine, spiders tumbling
from their silver webs.
The mask is raw and red as bark against your facebones. 
You finger the stripes ridged like weals 
out of your childhood. A wind is rising 
in the north, a scarlet light 
like a fire in the sky.
When you look through the eyeholes it is like falling.
Night gauzes you in black. You are blind
as in the beginning of the world. Sniff. Seek the moon.
After a while you will know
that creased musky smell is rising
from your skin.
Once you locate the ears the drums begin.
Your fur stiffens. A roar from the distant left,
like monsoon water. You swivel your sightless head.
Under your sheathed paw
the ground shifts wet.
What is that small wild sound
I walk the purple carpet into your eye 
carrying the silver butter server 
but a truck rumbles by, 
                      leaving its black tire prints on my foot 
and old images          the sound of banging screen doors on hot   
             afternoons and a fly buzzing over the Kool-Aid spilled on   
             the sink 
flicker, as reflections on the metal surface. 
Come in, you said, 
inside your paintings, inside the blood factory, inside the   
old songs that line your hands, inside 
eyes that change like a snowflake every second, 
inside spinach leaves holding that one piece of gravel, 
inside the whiskers of a cat, 
inside your old hat, and most of all inside your mouth where you   
grind the pigments with your teeth, painting 
with a broken bottle on the floor, and painting 
with an ostrich feather on the moon that rolls out of my mouth. 
You cannot let me walk inside you too long inside   
the veins where my small feet touch 
bottom. 
You must reach inside and pull me 
like a silver bullet 
from your arm. 
Up the reputable walks of old established trees 
They stalk, children of the nouveaux riches; chimes 
Of the tall Clock Tower drench their heads in blessing:   
“I don't wanna play at your house; 
I don't like you any more.” 
My house stands opposite, on the other hill, 
Among meadows, with the orchard fences down and falling;   
Deer come almost to the door. 
You cannot see it, even in this clearest morning. 
White birds hang in the air between 
Over the garbage landfill and those homes thereto adjacent,   
Hovering slowly, turning, settling down 
Like the flakes sifting imperceptibly onto the little town   
In a waterball of glass. 
And yet, this morning, beyond this quiet scene, 
The floating birds, the backyards of the poor, 
Beyond the shopping plaza, the dead canal, the hillside lying tilted in the air, 
Tomorrow has broken out today: 
Riot in Algeria, in Cyprus, in Alabama; 
Aged in wrong, the empires are declining, 
And China gathers, soundlessly, like evidence. 
What shall I say to the young on such a morning?— 
Mind is the one salvation?—also grammar?— 
No; my little ones lean not toward revolt. They 
Are the Whites, the vaguely furiously driven, who resist   
Their souls with such passivity 
As would make Quakers swear. All day, dear Lord, all day   
They wear their godhead lightly. 
They look out from their hill and say, 
To themselves, “We have nowhere to go but down;   
The great destination is to stay.” 
Surely the nations will be reasonable; 
They look at the world—don't they?—the world's way?   
The clock just now has nothing more to say. 
The days are dog-eared, the edges torn,   
ragged—like those pages   
I ripped once out of library books, 
for their photos 
of Vallejo and bootless Robert Johnson.   
A fine needs paying now 
it’s true, but   
not by me. 
I am no more guilty 
than that thrush is 
who sits there stripping moss   
off the wet bark of a tree. 
A red fleck, like his, glows 
at the back of my head—a beauty mark,   
left by the brain’s after-jets. 
I would not wish for the three brains   
Robert required 
to double-clutch his guitar 
and chase those sounds he had to know   
led down 
and into a troubled dusky river, always. 
Three brains did Johnson no earthly good,   
neither his nor Vallejo’s 4 & 1/2 
worked right exactly—O bunglers, 
O banged-up pans of disaster! 
Crying for days, said Cesar, & singing for months.   
How can I be so strong some times, 
at others weak? I wish to be free, 
but free to do what? To leave myself behind?   
To switch channels remotely? 
Better to sing. 
Not like the bird, but as they sang,   
Cesar & Robert— 
with the shocked & seeded   
sweetness of an apple 
split open by a meat cleaver. 
The stiff spokes of this wheel 
touch the sore spots of the earth.  
On the Potomac, swan-white 
power launches keep breasting the sulphurous wave.  
Otters slide and dive and slick back their hair, 
raccoons clean their meat in the creek.  
On the circles, green statues ride like South American 
liberators above the breeding vegetation—  
prongs and spearheads of some equatorial 
backland that will inherit the globe.  
The elect, the elected . . . they come here bright as dimes, 
and die dishevelled and soft.  
We cannot name their names, or number their dates— 
circle on circle, like rings on a tree—  
but we wish the river had another shore, 
some further range of delectable mountains,  
distant hills powdered blue as a girl’s eyelid. 
It seems the least little shove would land us there,  
that only the slightest repugnance of our bodies 
we no longer control could drag us back. 
The time you won your town the race 
We chaired you through the market-place; 
Man and boy stood cheering by, 
And home we brought you shoulder-high. 
Today, the road all runners come, 
Shoulder-high we bring you home, 
And set you at your threshold down, 
Townsman of a stiller town. 
Smart lad, to slip betimes away 
From fields where glory does not stay, 
And early though the laurel grows 
It withers quicker than the rose. 
Eyes the shady night has shut 
Cannot see the record cut, 
And silence sounds no worse than cheers 
After earth has stopped the ears. 
Now you will not swell the rout 
Of lads that wore their honours out, 
Runners whom renown outran 
And the name died before the man. 
So set, before its echoes fade, 
The fleet foot on the sill of shade, 
And hold to the low lintel up 
The still-defended challenge-cup. 
And round that early-laurelled head 
Will flock to gaze the strengthless dead, 
And find unwithered on its curls 
The garland briefer than a girl’s. 
Nobody heard him, the dead man,   
But still he lay moaning: 
I was much further out than you thought   
And not waving but drowning. 
Poor chap, he always loved larkinglarking Playing tricks, kidding, fooling around. 
And now he’s dead 
It must have been too cold for him his heart gave way,   
They said. 
Oh, no no no, it was too cold always   
(Still the dead one lay moaning)   
I was much too far out all my life   
I never thought I’d keep a record of my pain
 or happiness
 like candles lighting the entire soft lace
 of the air
 around the full length of your hair/a shower
 organized by God
 in brown and auburn
 undulations luminous like particles
 of flame
 But now I do
 retrieve an afternoon of apricots
 and water interspersed with cigarettes
 and sand and rocks
 we walked across:
                         How easily you held
 my hand
 beside the low tide
 of the world
 Now I do
relive an evening of retreat
 a bridge I left behind
 where all the solid heat
 of lust and tender trembling 
lay as cruel and as kind 
 as passion spins its infinite
 tergiversations in between the bitter
 and the sweet
 Alone and longing for you
 now I do 
In vain to me the smiling Mornings shine,
      And reddening Phœbus lifts his golden fire;
The birds in vain their amorous descant join;
      Or cheerful fields resume their green attire;
These ears, alas! for other notes repine,
      A different object do these eyes require;
My lonely anguish melts no heart but mine;
      And in my breast the imperfect joys expire.
Yet Morning smiles the busy race to cheer,
      And new-born pleasure brings to happier men;
The fields to all their wonted tribute bear;
      To warm their little loves the birds complain;
I fruitless mourn to him that cannot hear,
      And weep the more because I weep in vain.
I. 
Five soldiers fixed by Mathew Brady’s eye   
Stand in a land subdued beyond belief.   
Belief might lend them life again. I try 
Like orphaned Hamlet working up his grief 
To see my spellbound fathers in these men   
Who, breathless in their amber atmosphere,   
Show but the postures men affected then   
And the hermit faces of a finished year. 
The guns and gear and all are strange until   
Beyond the tents I glimpse a file of trees   
Verging a road that struggles up a hill.   
They’re sycamores. 
                            The long-abated breeze 
Flares in those boughs I know, and hauls the sound   
Of guns and a great forest in distress. 
Fathers, I know my cause, and we are bound   
Beyond that hill to fight at Wilderness. 
             II. 
But trick your eyes with Birnam Wood, or think   
How fire-cast shadows of the bankside trees   
Rode on the back of Simois to sink 
In the wide waters. Reflect how history’s 
Changes are like the sea’s, which mauls and mulls   
Its salvage of the world in shifty waves, 
Shrouding in evergreen the oldest hulls 
And yielding views of its confounded graves 
To the new moon, the sun, or any eye   
That in its shallow shoreward version sees 
The pebbles charging with a deathless cry   
And carageen memorials of trees. 
             III. 
Now, old man of the sea,   
I start to understand: 
The will will find no stillness 
Back in a stilled land. 
The dead give no command   
And shall not find their voice   
Till they be mustered by   
Some present fatal choice. 
Let me now rejoice 
In all impostures, take 
The shape of lion or leopard, 
Boar, or watery snake, 
Or like the comber break,   
Yet in the end stand fast   
And by some fervent fraud   
Father the waiting past, 
Resembling at the last 
The self-established tree 
That draws all waters toward   
Its live formality. 
Loveliest of trees, the cherry now 
Is hung with bloom along the bough, 
And stands about the woodland ride 
Wearing white for Eastertide. 
Now, of my threescore years and ten, 
Twenty will not come again, 
And take from seventy springs a score, 
It only leaves me fifty more. 
And since to look at things in bloom 
Fifty springs are little room, 
About the woodlands I will go 
To see the cherry hung with snow. 
Finnish rural life, ca. 1910Fires, always fires after midnight,
the sun depending in the purple birches
and gleaming like a copper kettle.
By the solstice they’d burned everything,
the bad-luck sleigh, a twisted rocker,
things “possessed” and not-quite-right.
The bonfire coils and lurches,
big as a house, and then it settles.
The dancers come, dressed like rainbows
(if rainbows could be spun),
and linking hands they turn
to the melancholy fiddles.
A red bird spreads its wings now
and in the darker days to come. 
Sleeping sister of a farther sky,
 dropped from zenith like a tender tone,
 the lucid apex of a scale unknown
 whose whitest whisper is an opaque cry
 of measureless frequency, the spectral sigh
 you breath, bright hydrogen and brighter zone
 of fissured carbon, consummated moan
 and ceaseless rapture of a brilliant why.
 Will nothing wake you from your livid rest?
 Essence of ether and astral stone
 the stunned polarities your substance weaves
 in one bright making, like a dream of leaves
 in the tree’s mind, summered. Or as a brooding bone
 roots constellations in the body’s nest. 
Surfaces serve 
their own purposes, 
strive to remain 
constant (all lives 
want that). There is   
a skin, not just on   
peaches but on oceans 
(note the telltale 
slough of foam on beaches). 
Sometimes it’s loose, 
as in the case 
of cats: you feel how a   
second life slides 
under it. Sometimes it 
fits. Take glass. 
Sometimes it outlasts 
its underside. Take reefs. 
The private lives of surfaces 
are innocent, not devious. 
Take the one-dimensional 
belief of enamel in itself, 
the furious autonomy 
of luster (crush a pearl— 
it’s powder), the whole 
curious seamlessness 
of how we’re each surrounded 
and what it doesn’t teach. 
You are clear 
O rose, cut in rock, 
hard as the descent of hail. 
I could scrape the colour   
from the petals 
like spilt dye from a rock. 
If I could break you   
I could break a tree. 
If I could stir 
I could break a tree— 
I could break you. 
O wind, rend open the heat,   
cut apart the heat,   
rend it to tatters. 
Fruit cannot drop   
through this thick air— 
fruit cannot fall into heat 
that presses up and blunts 
the points of pears   
and rounds the grapes. 
Cut the heat— 
plough through it, 
turning it on either side   
of your path. 
About the Shark, phlegmatical one, 
Pale sot of the Maldive sea, 
The sleek little pilot-fish, azure and slim, 
How alert in attendance be. 
From his saw-pit of mouth, from his charnel of maw 
They have nothing of harm to dread, 
But liquidly glide on his ghastly flank 
Or before his Gorgonian head; 
Or lurk in the port of serrated teeth 
In white triple tiers of glittering gates, 
And there find a haven when peril’s abroad, 
An asylum in jaws of the Fates! 
They are friends; and friendly they guide him to prey, 
Yet never partake of the treat— 
Eyes and brains to the dotard lethargic and dull, 
Pale ravener of horrible meat. 
Something blurred, warmed
in the eye’s corner, like woodsmoke 
becoming tears;
but when you turned to look
the stoop was still, the pumpkin
and tacky mum pot wouldn’t talk —
just a rattle
at the gutter and a sense
of curtains, somewhere, pulled.
Five of   them later, scarfing the oak’s
black bole, 
laying a dream of snakes.
Needy and reticent
at once, these squirrels in charred November
recall, in Virgil, 
what it is to feel: 
moods, half-moods, 
swarming, then darting loose; obscure
hunches that refuse
to speak, but still expect
in some flash of   luck
to be revealed. The less you try
to notice them,
the more they will know of  you. 
And if sun comes
How shall we greet him?
Shall we not dread him,
Shall we not fear him
After so lengthy a
Session with shade?
Though we have wept for him,
Though we have prayed
All through the night-years—
What if we wake one shimmering morning to
Hear the fierce hammering
Of his firm knuckles
Hard on the door?
Shall we not shudder?—
Shall we not flee
Into the shelter, the dear thick shelter
Of the familiar
Propitious haze?
Sweet is it, sweet is it
To sleep in the coolness
Of snug unawareness.
The dark hangs heavily
Over the eyes.
Yes. I remember Adlestrop—
The name, because one afternoon
Of heat the express-train drew up there
Unwontedly. It was late June.
The steam hissed. Someone cleared his throat.
No one left and no one came
On the bare platform. What I saw
Was Adlestrop—only the name
And willows, willow-herb, and grass,
And meadowsweet, and haycocks dry,
No whit less still and lonely fair
Than the high cloudlets in the sky.
And for that minute a blackbird sang
Close by, and round him, mistier,
Farther and farther, all the birds
Of Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire. 
To the one who sets a second place at the table anyway.    To the one at the back of the empty bus.  To the ones who name each piece of stained glass projected on a white wall.  To anyone convinced that a monologue is a conversation with the past.  To the one who loses with the deck he marked.    To those who are destined to inherit the meek.    To us.	
Somebody said that it couldn’t be done 
      But he with a chuckle replied 
That “maybe it couldn’t,” but he would be one 
      Who wouldn’t say so till he’d tried. 
So he buckled right in with the trace of a grin 
      On his face. If he worried he hid it. 
He started to sing as he tackled the thing 
      That couldn’t be done, and he did it! 
Somebody scoffed: “Oh, you’ll never do that; 
      At least no one ever has done it;” 
But he took off his coat and he took off his hat 
      And the first thing we knew he’d begun it. 
With a lift of his chin and a bit of a grin, 
      Without any doubting or quiddit, 
      That couldn’t be done, and he did it. 
There are thousands to tell you it cannot be done, 
      There are thousands to prophesy failure, 
There are thousands to point out to you one by one, 
      The dangers that wait to assail you. 
But just buckle in with a bit of a grin, 
      Just take off your coat and go to it; 
Just start in to sing as you tackle the thing 
      That “cannot be done,” and you’ll do it. 
Maybe you’ve heard about this. Maybe not.
A man came home and chucked his girlfriend’s cat
In the wood chipper. This really happened.
Dinner wasn’t ready on time. A lot
Of other little things went wrong. He spat
On her father, who came out when he learned
About it. He also broke her pinky,
Stole her checks, and got her sister pregnant.
But she stood by him, stood strong, through it all,
Because she loved him. She loved him, you see.
She actually said that, and then she went
And married him. She felt some unique call.
Don’t try to understand what another
Person means by love. Don’t even bother. 
It was midday before we noticed it was morning. 
The boy cousins brought us a tray—soup and cheese,   
warm soda, and a soft cloth and candy for her fever.   
They wouldn’t come in, the tray weighing between them.   
They stood like woodwork inside the door frame. 
By afternoon the old procession—silence at the lip   
of a dozen night travelers tired and grieving, one   
by one, or pairs floating to the bed and back   
with a touching of hands like humming, 
and the one we gathered for slipping farther 
for all the good we could do. She lay in her shadow.   
She looked to no one. Her daylilies bobbed wide   
open out in the wild, blue sun and the same bee   
kept nosing her window to reach them. 
Dusk: even the boys were back watching it try. 
When I know you are coming home
I put on this necklace:
glass beads on a silken thread,
a blue that used to match my eyes.
I like to think I am remembering you.
I like to think you don’t forget.
The necklace lies heavy on my skin,
it clatters when I reach down
to lift my screaming child.
I swing her, roll her in my arms until she forgets.
The beads glitter in the flicker of a TV set
as I sit her on my lap
and wish away the afternoon.
I wait until I hear a gate latch lift
the turn of key in lock.
I sit amongst toys and unwashed clothes,
I sit and she fingers the beads until you speak
in a voice that no longer seems familiar, only strange.
I turn as our child tugs at the string.
I hear a snap and a sound like falling rain. 
Whose was that gentle voice, that, whispering sweet, 
      Promised methought long days of bliss sincere! 
      Soothing it stole on my deluded ear, 
Most like soft music, that might sometimes cheat 
Thoughts dark and drooping! ’Twas the voice of Hope. 
      Of love and social scenes, it seemed to speak, 
      Of truth, of friendship, of affection meek; 
That, oh! poor friend, might to life’s downward slope 
Lead us in peace, and bless our latest hours. 
      Ah me! the prospect saddened as she sung; 
      Loud on my startled ear the death-bell rung; 
Chill darkness wrapt the pleasurable bowers, 
Whilst Horror, pointing to yon breathless clay, 
“No peace be thine,” exclaimed, “away, away!” 
Nothing has changed. They have a welcome sign,
a hill with cows and a white house on top,
a mall and grocery store where people shop,
a diner where some people go to dine.
It is the same no matter where you go,
and downtown you will find no big surprises.
Each fall the dew point falls until it rises.
White snow, green buds, green lawn, red leaves, white snow.
This is all right. This is their hope. And yet, 
though what you see is never what you get,
it does feel somehow changed from what it was.
Is it the people? Houses? Fields? The weather?
Is it the streets? Is it these things together?
Nothing here ever changes, till it does.
Mr. Kessler, you know, was in the army, 
And he drew six dollars a month as a pension, 
And stood on the corner talking politics, 
Or sat at home reading Grant’s Memoirs; 
And I supported the family by washing, 
Learning the secrets of all the people 
From their curtains, counterpanes, shirts and skirts. 
For things that are new grow old at length, 
They’re replaced with better or none at all: 
People are prospering or falling back. 
And rents and patches widen with time; 
No thread or needle can pace decay, 
And there are stains that baffle soap, 
And there are colors that run in spite of you, 
Blamed though you are for spoiling a dress. 
Handkerchiefs, napery, have their secrets
The laundress, Life, knows all about it. 
And I, who went to all the funerals 
Held in Spoon River, swear I never 
Saw a dead face without thinking it looked 
Like something washed and ironed. 
How time reverses   
The proud in heart!   
I now make verses   
Who aimed at art. 
But I sleep well.   
Ambitious boys 
Whose big lines swell   
With spiritual noise, 
Despise me not! 
And be not queasy   
To praise somewhat:   
Verse is not easy. 
But rage who will. 
Time that procured me   
Good sense and skill   
Of madness cured me. 
Of the sleeves, I remember their weight, like wet wool, 
on my arms, and the empty ends which hung past my hands.   
Of the body of the shirt, I remember the large buttons   
and larger buttonholes, which made a rack of wheels   
down my chest and could not be quickly unbuttoned.   
Of the collar, I remember its thickness without starch, 
by which it lay against my clavicle without moving.   
Of my trousers, the same—heavy, bulky, slow to give   
for a leg, a crowded feeling, a molasses to walk in.   
Of my boots, I remember the brittle soles, of a material   
that had not been made love to by any natural substance,   
and the laces: ropes to make prisoners of my feet.   
Of the helmet, I remember the webbed, inner liner,   
a brittle plastic underwear on which wobbled 
the crushing steel pot then strapped at the chin.   
Of the mortar, I remember the mortar plate, 
heavy enough to kill by weight, which I carried by rope.   
Of the machine gun, I remember the way it fit 
behind my head and across my shoulder blades   
as I carried it, or, to be precise, as it rode me. 
Of tactics, I remember the likelihood of shooting 
the wrong man, the weight of the rifle bolt, the difficulty   
of loading while prone, the shock of noise. 
For earplugs, some used cigarette filters or toilet paper.   
I don’t hear well now, for a man of my age, 
and the doctor says my ears were damaged and asks   
if I was in the Army, and of course I was but then   
a wounded eardrum wasn’t much in the scheme. 
Those blessèd structures, plot and rhyme— 
why are they no help to me now 
I want to make 
something imagined, not recalled? 
I hear the noise of my own voice: 
The painter’s vision is not a lens, 
it trembles to caress the light.
1
God moves in a mysterious way,
      His wonders to perform;
He plants his footsteps in the sea,
      And rides upon the storm.
2
Deep in unfathomable mines
      Of never-failing skill,
He treasures up his bright designs,
      And works his sov'reign will.
3
Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take,
      The clouds ye so much dread
Are big with mercy, and shall break
      In blessings on your head.
4
Judge not the Lord by feeble sense,
      But trust him for his grace;
Behind a frowning providence
      He hides a smiling face.
5
His purposes will ripen fast,
      Unfolding ev'ry hour;
The bud may have a bitter taste,
      But sweet will be the flow'r.
6
Blind unbelief is sure to err,
      And scan his work in vain;
God is his own interpreter,
      And he will make it plain.
Not for that city of the level sun,
     Its golden streets and glittering gates ablaze—
     The shadeless, sleepless city of white days,
White nights, or nights and days that are as one—
We weary, when all is said , all thought, all done.
     We strain our eyes beyond this dusk to see
     What, from the threshold of eternity
We shall step into. No, I think we shun
The splendour of that everlasting glare,
   The clamour of that never-ending song.
   And if for anything we greatly long,
It is for some remote and quiet stair
     Which winds to silence and a space for sleep
     Too sound for waking and for dreams too deep. 
When I put my finger to the hole they've cut for a dimmer switch   
in a wall of plaster stiffened with horsehair   
it seems I've scratched a two-hundred-year-old itch   
with a pink and a pink and a pinkie-pick.  
When I put my ear to the hole I'm suddenly aware   
of spades and shovels turning up the gain   
all the way from Raritan to the Delaware   
with a clink and a clink and a clinky-click.  
When I put my nose to the hole I smell the floodplain   
of the canal after a hurricane   
and the spots of green grass where thousands of Irish have lain 
with a stink and a stink and a stinky-stick.  
When I put my eye to the hole I see one holding horse dung to the rain   
in the hope, indeed, indeed,   
of washing out a few whole ears of grain 
with a wink and a wink and a winkie-wick.  
And when I do at last succeed   
in putting my mouth to the horsehair-fringed niche   
I can taste the small loaf of bread he baked from that whole seed 
with a link and a link and a linky-lick.  
We sat together at one summer’s end, 
That beautiful mild woman, your close friend,   
And you and I, and talked of poetry. 
I said, ‘A line will take us hours maybe; 
Yet if it does not seem a moment’s thought,   
Our stitching and unstitching has been naught.   
Better go down upon your marrow-bones   
And scrub a kitchen pavement, or break stones   
Like an old pauper, in all kinds of weather;   
For to articulate sweet sounds together 
Is to work harder than all these, and yet   
Be thought an idler by the noisy set 
Of bankers, schoolmasters, and clergymen   
The martyrs call the world.’ 
                                          And thereupon 
That beautiful mild woman for whose sake   
There’s many a one shall find out all heartache   
On finding that her voice is sweet and low   
Replied, ‘To be born woman is to know— 
Although they do not talk of it at school— 
That we must labour to be beautiful.’ 
I said, ‘It’s certain there is no fine thing   
Since Adam’s fall but needs much labouring. 
There have been lovers who thought love should be   
So much compounded of high courtesy   
That they would sigh and quote with learned looks   
Precedents out of beautiful old books;   
Yet now it seems an idle trade enough.’ 
We sat grown quiet at the name of love;   
We saw the last embers of daylight die,   
And in the trembling blue-green of the sky   
A moon, worn as if it had been a shell   
Washed by time’s waters as they rose and fell   
About the stars and broke in days and years. 
I had a thought for no one’s but your ears:   
That you were beautiful, and that I strove   
To love you in the old high way of love; 
That it had all seemed happy, and yet we’d grown   
As weary-hearted as that hollow moon. 
Some say the world will end in fire, 
Some say in ice. 
From what I’ve tasted of desire 
I hold with those who favor fire. 
But if it had to perish twice, 
I think I know enough of hate 
To say that for destruction ice 
Is also great 
And would suffice. 
Come into animal presence.
No man is so guileless as
the serpent. The lonely white
rabbit on the roof is a star
twitching its ears at the rain.
The llama intricately
folding its hind legs to be seated
not disdains but mildly
disregards human approval.
What joy when the insouciant
armadillo glances at us and doesn't
quicken his trotting
across the track into the palm brush.
What is this joy? That no animal
falters, but knows what it must do?
That the snake has no blemish,
that the rabbit inspects his strange surroundings
in white star-silence? The llama
rests in dignity, the armadillo
has some intention to pursue in the palm-forest.
Those who were sacred have remained so,
holiness does not dissolve, it is a presence
of bronze, only the sight that saw it
faltered and turned from it.
An old joy returns in holy presence. 
A professor invites me to his “Black Lit” class; they’re 
reading Larson’s Passing. One of the black 
students says, “Sometimes light-skinned blacks 
think they can fool other blacks, 
but I can always tell,” looking 
right through me. 
After I tell them I am black, 
I ask the class, “Was I passing 
when I was just sitting here, 
before I told you?” A white woman 
shakes her head desperately, as if 
I had deliberately deceived her. 
She keeps examining my face, 
then turning away 
as if she hopes I’ll disappear. Why presume 
“passing” is based on what I leave out 
and not what she fills in? 
In one scene in the book, in a restaurant, 
she’s “passing,” 
though no one checked her at the door— 
“Hey, you black?” 
My father, who looked white, 
told me this story: every year 
when he’d go to get his driver’s license, 
the man at the window filling 
out the form would ask, 
“White or black?” pencil poised, without looking up. 
My father wouldn’t pass, but he might 
use silence to trap a devil. 
When he didn’t speak, the man 
would look up at my father’s face. 
“What did he write?” 
my father quizzed me. 
A thousand martyrs I have made, 
   All sacrificed to my desire; 
A thousand beauties have betrayed, 
   That languish in resistless fire. 
The untamed heart to hand I brought, 
And fixed the wild and wandering thought. 
I never vowed nor sighed in vain 
   But both, though false, were well received. 
The fair are pleased to give us pain, 
   And what they wish is soon believed. 
And though I talked of wounds and smart, 
Love’s pleasures only touched my heart. 
Alone the glory and the spoil 
   I always laughing bore away; 
The triumphs, without pain or toil, 
   Without the hell, the heav’n of joy. 
And while I thus at random rove 
Despise the fools that whine for love. 
To clasp you now and feel your head close-pressed, 
Scented and warm against my beating breast; 
To whisper soft and quivering your name, 
And drink the passion burning in your frame; 
To lie at full length, taut, with cheek to cheek, 
And tease your mouth with kisses till you speak 
Love words, mad words, dream words, sweet senseless words, 
Melodious like notes of mating birds; 
To hear you ask if I shall love always, 
And myself answer: Till the end of days; 
To feel your easeful sigh of happiness 
When on your trembling lips I murmur: Yes; 
It is so sweet. We know it is not true. 
What matters it? The night must shed her dew. 
We know it is not true, but it is sweet— 
The poem with this music is complete. 
I go to the mountain side 
of the house to cut saplings, 
and clear a view to snow 
on the mountain. But when I look up, 
saw in hand, I see a nest clutched in 
the uppermost branches. 
I don’t cut that one. 
I don’t cut the others either. 
Suddenly, in every tree,   
an unseen nest 
where a mountain   
would be. 
                        
                              for Drago Štambuk 
This rose-tree is not made to bear 
The violet blue, nor lily fair, 
   Nor the sweet mignionet: 
And if this tree were discontent, 
Or wished to change its natural bent, 
   It all in vain would fret. 
And should it fret, you would suppose 
It ne’er had seen its own red rose, 
   Nor after gentle shower 
Had ever smelled its rose’s scent, 
Or it could ne’er be discontent 
   With its own pretty flower. 
Like such a blind and senseless tree 
As I’ve imagined this to be, 
   All envious persons are: 
With care and culture all may find 
Some pretty flower in their own mind, 
   Some talent that is rare. 
No moon floods the memory of that night 
only the rain I remember the cold rain 
against our faces and mixing with your tears 
and your mouth soft and warm 
no moon no stars no jagged pain 
of lightning only my impotent tongue 
and the red rage within my brain 
knowing that the chilling rain was our forever 
even as I tried to explain: 
“A revolutionary is a doomed man 
with no certainties but love and history.” 
“But our children must grow up with certainties 
and they will make the revolution.” 
“By example we must show the way so plain 
that our children can go neither right 
nor left but straight to freedom.” 
“No,” you said. And you left. 
and praying that like the rain 
returns to the sky you would return to me again. 
I’d have you known! It puzzles me forever   
To hear, day in, day out, the words men use,   
But never a single word about you, never.   
Strange!—in your every gesture, worlds of news.   
On busses people talk. On curbs I hear them;   
In parks I listen, barbershop and bar.   
In banks they murmur, and I sidle near them;   
But none allude to you there. None so far. 
I read books too, and turn the pages, spying:   
You must be there, one beautiful as you!   
But never, not by name. No planes are flying   
Your name in lacy trailers past the blue   
Marquees of heaven. No trumpets cry your fame.   
Strange!—how no constellations spell your name! 
As a sloop with a sweep of immaculate wing on her delicate spine
And a keel as steel as a root that holds in the sea as she leans,
Leaning and laughing, my warm-hearted beauty, you ride, you ride,
You tack on the curves with parabola speed and a kiss of goodbye,
Like a thoroughbred sloop, my new high-spirited spirit, my kiss.
As my foot suggests that you leap in the air with your hips of a girl,
My finger that praises your wheel and announces your voices of song,
Flouncing your skirts, you blueness of joy, you flirt of politeness,
You leap, you intelligence, essence of wheelness with silvery nose,
And your platinum clocks of excitement stir like the hairs of a fern.
But how alien you are from the booming belts of your birth and the smoke
Where you turned on the stinging lathes of Detroit and Lansing at night
And shrieked at the torch in your secret parts and the amorous tests,
But now with your eyes that enter the future of roads you forget;
You are all instinct with your phosphorous glow and your streaking hair.
And now when we stop it is not as the bird from the shell that I leave
Or the leathery pilot who steps from his bird with a sneer of delight,
And not as the ignorant beast do you squat and watch me depart,
But with exquisite breathing you smile, with satisfaction of love,
And I touch you again as you tick in the silence and settle in sleep. 
I buried my father 
in the sky. 
Since then, the birds 
clean and comb him every morning   
and pull the blanket up to his chin   
every night. 
I buried my father underground.   
Since then, my ladders 
only climb down, 
and all the earth has become a house   
whose rooms are the hours, whose doors   
stand open at evening, receiving   
guest after guest. 
Sometimes I see past them 
to the tables spread for a wedding feast. 
I buried my father in my heart. 
Now he grows in me, my strange son,   
my little root who won’t drink milk,   
little pale foot sunk in unheard-of night,   
little clock spring newly wet 
in the fire, little grape, parent to the future   
wine, a son the fruit of his own son,   
little father I ransom with my life. 
Much Madness is divinest Sense -
To a discerning Eye -
Much Sense - the starkest Madness - 
’Tis the Majority 
In this, as all, prevail -
Assent - and you are sane -
Demur - you’re straightway dangerous - 
And handled with a Chain - 
My father in the night commanding No 
Has work to do. Smoke issues from his lips;   
      He reads in silence. 
The frogs are croaking and the street lamps glow. 
And then my mother winds the gramophone;   
The Bride of Lammermoor begins to shriek— 
      Or reads a story— 
About a prince, a castle, and a dragon. 
The moon is glittering above the hill. 
I stand before the gateposts of the King— 
      So runs the story 
Of Thule, at midnight when the mice are still. 
And I have been in Thule! It has come true— 
The journey and the danger of the world,   
      All that there is 
To bear and to enjoy, endure and do. 
Landscapes, seascapes ... where have I been led?   
The names of cities—Paris, Venice, Rome— 
      Held out their arms. 
A feathered god, seductive, went ahead. 
Here is my house. Under a red rose tree   
A child is swinging; another gravely plays.   
      They are not surprised 
That I am here; they were expecting me. 
And yet my father sits and reads in silence,   
My mother sheds a tear, the moon is still,   
      And the dark wind 
Is murmuring that nothing ever happens. 
Beyond his jurisdiction as I move 
Do I not prove him wrong? And yet, it’s true   
      They will not change 
There, on the stage of terror and of love. 
The actors in that playhouse always sit   
In fixed positions—father, mother, child 
      With painted eyes. 
How sad it is to be a little puppet! 
Their heads are wooden. And you once pretended   
To understand them! Shake them as you will,   
      They cannot speak. 
Do what you will, the comedy is ended. 
Father, why did you work? Why did you weep,   
Mother? Was the story so important? 
      “Listen!” the wind 
Said to the children, and they fell asleep. 
“Saturday’s child must work for a living.”“I’m moving from Grief  Street.
Taxes are high here
though the mortgage’s cheap.
The house is well built.
With stuff to protect, that
mattered to me,
the security.
These things that I mind,
you know, aren’t mine.
I mind minding them.
They weigh on my mind.
I don’t mind them well.
I haven’t got the knack
of  kindly minding.
I say Take them back
but you never do.
When I throw them out
it may frighten you
and maybe me too.
                 Maybe
it will empty me
too emptily
and keep me here
asleep, at sea
under the guilt quilt,
under the you tree.” 
I wanted to know what it was like before we 
had voices and before we had bare fingers and before we 
had minds to move us through our actions 
and tears to help us over our feelings, 
so I drove my daughter through the snow to meet her friend 
and filled her car with suitcases and hugged her 
as an animal would, pressing my forehead against her, 
walking in circles, moaning, touching her cheek, 
and turned my head after them as an animal would, 
watching helplessly as they drove over the ruts, 
her smiling face and her small hand just visible 
over the giant pillows and coat hangers 
as they made their turn into the empty highway. 
For Angela  The Windigo is a flesh-eating, wintry demon with a man buried deep inside of it. In some Chippewa stories, a young girl vanquishes this monster by forcing boiling lard down its throat, thereby releasing the human at the core of ice.You knew I was coming for you, little one, 
when the kettle jumped into the fire. 
Towels flapped on the hooks, 
and the dog crept off, groaning, 
to the deepest part of the woods. 
In the hackles of dry brush a thin laughter started up. 
Mother scolded the food warm and smooth in the pot 
and called you to eat. 
But I spoke in the cold trees: 
New one, I have come for you, child hide and lie still. 
The sumac pushed sour red cones through the air. 
Copper burned in the raw wood. 
You saw me drag toward you. 
Oh touch me, I murmured, and licked the soles of your feet. 
You dug your hands into my pale, melting fur. 
I stole you off, a huge thing in my bristling armor. 
Steam rolled from my wintry arms, each leaf shivered 
from the bushes we passed 
until they stood, naked, spread like the cleaned spines of fish. 
Then your warm hands hummed over and shoveled themselves full 
of the ice and the snow. I would darken and spill 
all night running, until at last morning broke the cold earth 
and I carried you home, 
a river shaking in the sun. 
Love lives beyond 
The tomb, the earth, which fades like dew— 
               I love the fond, 
The faithful, and the true 
               Love lives in sleep, 
'Tis happiness of healthy dreams 
               Eve’s dews may weep, 
But love delightful seems. 
               'Tis seen in flowers, 
And in the even's pearly dew 
               On earth's green hours, 
And in the heaven's eternal blue. 
               ‘Tis heard in spring 
When light and sunbeams, warm and kind, 
               On angels’ wing 
Bring love and music to the wind. 
               And where is voice, 
So young, so beautiful and sweet 
               As nature’s choice, 
Where Spring and lovers meet? 
               Love lives beyond 
The tomb, the earth, the flowers, and dew. 
The faithful, young and true. 
When I have fears that I may cease to be 
   Before my pen has gleaned my teeming brain, 
Before high-pilèd books, in charactery, 
   Hold like rich garners the full ripened grain; 
When I behold, upon the night’s starred face, 
   Huge cloudy symbols of a high romance, 
And think that I may never live to trace 
   Their shadows with the magic hand of chance; 
And when I feel, fair creature of an hour, 
   That I shall never look upon thee more, 
Never have relish in the faery power 
   Of unreflecting love—then on the shore 
Of the wide world I stand alone, and think 
Till love and fame to nothingness do sink. 
If you are going there by foot, prepare 
to get wet. You are not you anymore.
You are a girl standing in a pool 
of clouds as they catch fire in the distance.
There are laws of   heaven and those of   place
and those who see the sky in the water,
angels in ashes that are the delta’s now. 
They say if you sweep the trash from your house
after dark, you sweep away your luck.
If you are going by foot, bring a stick,
a third leg, and honor the great disorder,
the great broom of waterfowl and songbirds.
Prepare to voodoo your way, best you can,
knowing there is a little water in things
you take for granted, a little charity
and squalor for the smallest forms of life. 
Voodoo was always mostly charity.
People forget. If you shake a tablecloth
outside at night, someone in your family
dies. There are laws we make thinking
it was us who made them. We are not us.
We are a floodplain by the Mississippi
that once poured slaves upriver to the fields.
We are a hurricane in the making.
We could use a magus who knows something
about suffering, who knows a delta’s needs.
We understand if   you want a widow 
to stay single, cut up her husband’s shoes.
He is not himself anyway and walks
barefoot across a landscape that has no north.
Only a ghost tree here and there, a frog,
a cricket, a bird. And if the fates are kind,
a girl with a stick, who is more at home, 
being homeless, than you will ever be. 
Turning and turning in the widening gyre   
The falcon cannot hear the falconer; 
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; 
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world, 
The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere   
The ceremony of innocence is drowned; 
The best lack all conviction, while the worst   
Are full of passionate intensity. 
Surely some revelation is at hand; 
Surely the Second Coming is at hand.   
The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out   
When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi 
Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert   
A shape with lion body and the head of a man,   
A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun,   
Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it   
Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds.   
The darkness drops again; but now I know   
That twenty centuries of stony sleep 
Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle,   
And what rough beast, its hour come round at last,   
Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born? 
A little black thing among the snow,
Crying "weep! 'weep!" in notes of woe!
"Where are thy father and mother? say?"
"They are both gone up to the church to pray.
Because I was happy upon the heath,
And smil'd among the winter's snow,
They clothed me in the clothes of death,
And taught me to sing the notes of woe.
And because I am happy and dance and sing,
They think they have done me no injury,
And are gone to praise God and his Priest and King,
Who make up a heaven of our misery."
Oh chimes set high on the sunny tower   
    Ring on, ring on unendingly, 
Make all the hours a single hour,   
For when the dusk begins to flower,   
    The man I love will come to me! ... 
But no, go slowly as you will, 
    I should not bid you hasten so,   
For while I wait for love to come,   
Some other girl is standing dumb, 
    Fearing her love will go. 
Oh white steam over the roofs, blow high!   
    Oh chimes in the tower ring clear and free!   
Oh sun awake in the covered sky, 
    For the man I love, loves me! ... 
Oh drifting steam disperse and die, 
    Oh tower stand shrouded toward the south,— 
Fate heard afar my happy cry, 
    And laid her finger on my mouth. 
       III 
The dusk was blue with blowing mist,   
    The lights were spangles in a veil,   
And from the clamor far below 
    Floated faint music like a wail. 
It voiced what I shall never speak, 
    My heart was breaking all night long, 
But when the dawn was hard and gray,   
    My tears distilled into a song. 
       IV 
I said, “I have shut my heart   
    As one shuts an open door, 
That Love may starve therein   
    And trouble me no more.” 
But over the roofs there came 
    The wet new wind of May, 
And a tune blew up from the curb 
    Where the street-pianos play. 
My room was white with the sun   
    And Love cried out to me, 
“I am strong, I will break your heart   
    Unless you set me free.” 
Feel the patient’s heart Pounding—oh please, this once— —JAMES MERRILLI’ll do what I must if I’m bold in real time.   
A refugee, I’ll be paroled in real time. 
Cool evidence clawed off like shirts of hell-fire?   
A former existence untold in real time ... 
The one you would choose: Were you led then by him?   
What longing, O Yaar, is controlled in real time? 
Each syllable sucked under waves of our earth— 
The funeral love comes to hold in real time! 
They left him alive so that he could be lonely— 
The god of small things is not consoled in real time. 
Please afterwards empty my pockets of keys— 
It’s hell in the city of gold in real time. 
God’s angels again are—for Satan!—forlorn.   
Salvation was bought but sin sold in real time. 
And who is the terrorist, who the victim? 
We’ll know if the country is polled in real time. 
“Behind a door marked DANGER” are being unwound 
the prayers my friend had enscrolled in real time. 
The throat of the rearview and sliding down it   
the Street of Farewell’s now unrolled in real time. 
I heard the incessant dissolving of silk— 
I felt my heart growing so old in real time. 
Her heart must be ash where her body lies burned.   
What hope lets your hands rake the cold in real time? 
Now Friend, the Belovèd has stolen your words— 
Read slowly: The plot will unfold in real time. 
(for Daniel Hall) 
Dead friends coming back to life, dead family, 
speaking languages living and dead, their minds retentive, 
their five senses intact, their footprints like a butterfly’s, 
mercy shining from their comprehensive faces—
this is one of my favorite things. 
I like it so much I sleep all the time. 
Moon by day and sun by night find me dispersed
deep in the dreams where they appear.
In fields of goldenrod, in the city of five pyramids, 
before the empress with the melting face, under 
the towering plane tree, they just show up.
“It’s all right,” they seem to say. “It always was.”
They are diffident and polite. 
(Who knew the dead were so polite?)
They don’t want to scare me; their heads don’t spin like weather vanes.
They don’t want to steal my body
and possess the earth and wreak vengeance.
They’re dead, you understand, they don’t exist. And, besides,
why would they care? They’re subatomic, horizontal. Think about it.
One of them shyly offers me a pencil. 
The eyes under the eyelids dart faster and faster. 
Through the intercom of the house where for so long there was no music,
the right Reverend Al Green is singing,
“I could never see tomorrow. 
I was never told about the sorrow.” 
Learn from the man who spends much of his life speaking
             To the back of your head knowing what it means to follow
The razor’s edge along a worn strop or random thoughts
             As they spring so invisibly from the mind to a mouth
Who shouldered soldiers in two wars and fled fire fields
             Undecorated who fathered once but was fatherless forever
And who works his sentiments in deeper into your scalp
             Under a sign on the knotty-pine walls whose rubric reads
quot homines, tot sententiae which means he sees
             In you his suffering smells of horehound tonics and gels
Pillow heads and powders and a floor full of snippings
             Swept neatly every evening into a pile for the field mice
All those roundabout hours only a man who fixes his tie
             To clip crabgrass crowding a lady’s grave could believe
With a certain clean devotion and who would never for one
             Moment dream of hurting you when your back was turned
She’s with Grandma in front
 of Grandma’s house, backed
 by a willow tree, gladiola and roses.
 Who did she ever want
 to please? But Grandma
 seems half-pleased and annoyed.
 No doubt Mother frowns
 behind the lens, wants
 to straighten this sassy face.
 Maybe laughs, too.
 Little girl with her mouth wide,
 tongue out, yelling
 at the camera. See her little
 white purse full of treasure,
 her white sandals?
 She has things to do,
 you can tell. Places to explore
 beyond the frame,
 and these women picking flowers
 and taking pictures.
 Why won’t they let her go? 
    The poet pursues his beautiful theme;
The preacher his golden beatitude;
    And I run after a vanishing dream—
    The glittering, will-o’-the-wispish gleam
Of the properly scholarly attitude—
The highly desirable, the very advisable,
The hardly acquirable, properly scholarly attitude.
    I envy the savage without any clothes,
Who lives in a tropical latitude;
    It’s little of general culture he knows.
    But then he escapes the worrisome woes
The unceasingly sighed over, wept over, cried over,
The futilely died over, properly scholarly attitude.
    I work and I work till I nearly am dead,
And could say what the watchman said—that I could!
    But still, with a sigh and a shake of the head,
    “You don’t understand,” it is ruthlessly said,
“The properly scholarly attitude—
The aye to be sought for, wrought for and fought for,
The ne’er to be caught for, properly scholarly attitude—”
    I really am sometimes tempted to say
That it’s merely a glittering platitude;
    That people have just fallen into the way,
    When lacking a subject, to tell of the sway
The easily preachable, spread-eagle speechable,
In practice unreachable, properly scholarly attitude. 
In 1915 my grandfather’s 
neighbors surrounded his house 
near the dayline he ran 
on the Hudson 
in Catskill, NY 
and thought they’d burn 
his family out 
in a movie they’d just seen 
and be rid of his kind: 
the death of a lone black 
family is the Birth 
of a Nation, 
or so they thought. 
His 5’4” waiter gait 
quenched the white jacket smile 
he’d brought back from watered 
polish of my father 
on the turning seats, 
and he asked his neighbors 
up on his thatched porch 
for the first blossom of fire 
that would bring him down. 
They went away, his nation, 
spittooning their torched necks 
in the shadows of the riverboat 
they’d seen, posse decomposing; 
and I see him on Sutter 
with white bag from your 
restaurant, challenged by his first 
grandson to a foot-race 
he will win in white clothes. 
I see him as he buys galoshes 
for his railed yard near Mineo’s 
metal shop, where roses jump 
as the el circles his house 
toward Brooklyn, where his rain fell; 
and I see cigar smoke in his eyes, 
chocolate Madison Square Garden chews 
he breaks on his set teeth, 
stitched up after cancer, 
the great white nation immovable 
as his weight wilts 
and he is on a porch 
that won’t hold my arms, 
or the legs of the race run 
forwards, or the film 
played backwards on his grandson’s eyes. 
I was born in minutes in a roadside kitchen a skillet
whispering my name. I was born to rainwater and lye;
I was born across the river where I
was borrowed with clothespins, a harrow tooth,
broadsides sewn in my shoes. I returned, though
it please you, through no fault of my own,
pockets filled with coffee grounds and eggshells.
I was born still and superstitious; I bore an unexpected burden.
I gave birth, I gave blessing, I gave rise to suspicion.
I was born abandoned outdoors in the heat-shaped air,
air drifting like spirits and old windows.
I was born a fraction and a cipher and a ledger entry;
I was an index of first lines when I was born.
I was born waist-deep stubborn in the water crying
                              ain’t I a woman and a brother I was born
to this hall of mirrors, this horror story I was
born with a prologue of references, pursued
by mosquitoes and thieves, I was born passing
off the problem of the twentieth century: I was born.
I read minds before I could read fishes and loaves;
I walked a piece of the way alone before I was born. 
My mother died one summer— 
the wettest in the records of the state. 
Crops rotted in the west. 
Checked tablecloths dissolved in back gardens. 
Empty deck chairs collected rain. 
As I took my way to her 
through traffic, through lilacs dripping blackly 
behind houses 
and on curbsides, to pay her 
the last tribute of a daughter, I thought of something 
I remembered 
I heard once, that the body is, or is 
said to be, almost all 
water and as I turned southward, that ours is 
a city of it, 
one in which 
every single day the elements begin 
a journey towards each other that will never, 
given our weather, 
fail— 
       the ocean visible in the edges cut by it, 
cloud color reaching into air, 
the Liffey storing one and summoning the other, 
salt greeting the lack of it at the North Wall and, 
as if that wasn't enough, all of it 
ending up almost every evening 
inside our speech— 
coast canal ocean river stream and now 
mother and I drove on and although 
the mind is unreliable in grief, at 
the next cloudburst it almost seemed 
they could be shades of each other, 
the way the body is 
of every one of them and now 
they were on the move again—fog into mist, 
mist into sea spray and both into the oily glaze 
that lay on the railings of 
the house she was dying in 
as I went inside. 
I wanted so ably 
to reassure you, I wanted 
the man you took to be me, 
to comfort you, and got 
up, and went to the window, 
pushed back, as you asked me to, 
the curtain, to see 
the outline of the trees 
in the night outside. 
The light, love, 
the light we felt then, 
greyly, was it, that 
came in, on us, not 
merely my hands or yours, 
or a wetness so comfortable, 
but in the dark then 
as you slept, the grey 
figure came so close 
and leaned over, 
between us, as you 
slept, restless, and 
my own face had to 
see it, and be seen by it, 
the man it was, your 
grey lost tired bewildered 
brother, unused, untaken— 
hated by love, and dead, 
but not dead, for an 
instant, saw me, myself 
the intruder, as he was not. 
I tried to say, it is 
all right, she is 
happy, you are no longer 
needed. I said, 
he is dead, and he 
went as you shifted 
and woke, at first afraid, 
then knew by my own knowing 
what had happened— 
and the light then 
of the sun coming 
for another morning 
in the world. 
Let it be forgotten, as a flower is forgotten, 
   Forgotten as a fire that once was singing gold, 
Let it be forgotten for ever and ever, 
   Time is a kind friend, he will make us old. 
If anyone asks, say it was forgotten 
   Long and long ago, 
As a flower, as a fire, as a hushed footfall 
   In a long forgotten snow. 
One granite ridge 
A tree, would be enough 
Or even a rock, a small creek, 
A bark shred in a pool. 
Hill beyond hill, folded and twisted   
Tough trees crammed 
In thin stone fractures 
A huge moon on it all, is too much.   
The mind wanders. A million 
Summers, night air still and the rocks   
Warm.   Sky over endless mountains.   
All the junk that goes with being human   
Drops away, hard rock wavers 
Even the heavy present seems to fail   
This bubble of a heart. 
Words and books 
Like a small creek off a high ledge   
Gone in the dry air. 
A clear, attentive mind 
Has no meaning but that 
Which sees is truly seen. 
No one loves rock, yet we are here.   
Night chills. A flick 
In the moonlight 
Slips into Juniper shadow: 
Back there unseen 
Cold proud eyes 
Of Cougar or Coyote 
Watch me rise and go. 
Like the foghorn that’s all lung, 
the wind chime that’s all percussion,   
like the wind itself, that’s merely air   
in a terrible fret, without so much   
as a finger to articulate 
what ails it, the aeolian 
syrinx, that reed 
in the throat of a bird, 
when it comes to the shaping of   
what we call consonants, is   
too imprecise for consensus   
about what it even seems to   
be saying: is it o-ka-lee 
or con-ka-ree, is it really jug jug, 
is it cuckoo for that matter?— 
much less whether a bird’s call   
means anything in 
particular, or at all. 
Syntax comes last, there can be   
no doubt of it: came last,   
can be thought of (is 
thought of by some) as a   
higher form of expression:   
is, in extremity, first to   
be jettisoned: as the diva   
onstage, all soaring 
pectoral breathwork, 
takes off, pure vowel 
breaking free of the dry,   
the merely fricative 
husk of the particular, rises   
past saving anything, any   
more than the wind in   
the trees, waves breaking,   
or Homer’s gibbering   
Thespesiae iachē: 
those last-chance vestiges   
above the threshold, the all- 
but dispossessed of breath. 
At times it is like watching a face you have just met,
 trying to decide who it reminds you of—
 no one, surely, whom you ever hated or loved,
 but yes, somebody, somebody. You watch the face
 as it turns and nods, showing you, at certain angles,
 a curve of the lips or a lift of the eyebrow
 that is exactly right, and still the lost face
 eludes you. Now this face is talking, and you hear
 a sound in the voice, the accent on certain words—
 yes! a phrase . . . you barely recall sitting outside,
 by a pool or a campfire, remarking
 a peculiar, recurring expression. Two syllables,
 wasn’t it? Doorknob? Bathroom? Shawcross? What the hell
 kind of word is shawcross? A name; not the right one.
 A couple of syllables that could possibly be
 a little like something you may once have heard.
 So the talk drifts, and you drift, sneaking glances,
 pounding your brain. Days later a face occurs to you,
 and yes, there is a resemblance. That odd word, though,
 or phrase, is gone. It must have been somebody else.
 Yes, it’s like that, at times; something is, maybe;
 and there are days when you can almost say what it is. 
Go and catch a falling star, 
    Get with child a mandrake root, 
Tell me where all past years are, 
    Or who cleft the devil's foot, 
Teach me to hear mermaids singing, 
Or to keep off envy's stinging, 
            And find 
            What wind 
Serves to advance an honest mind. 
If thou be'st born to strange sights, 
    Things invisible to see, 
Ride ten thousand days and nights, 
    Till age snow white hairs on thee, 
Thou, when thou return'st, wilt tell me, 
All strange wonders that befell thee, 
            And swear, 
            No where 
Lives a woman true, and fair. 
If thou find'st one, let me know, 
    Such a pilgrimage were sweet; 
Yet do not, I would not go, 
    Though at next door we might meet; 
Though she were true, when you met her, 
And last, till you write your letter, 
            Yet she 
            Will be 
False, ere I come, to two, or three. 
Poetry Out Loud Note: In the print anthology, this poem is titled simply "Song." The student may give either title during the recitation.  
Beneath all this I’m carving a cathedral
of salt. I keep
the entrance hidden, no one seems to notice
the hours I’m missing  ...    I’ll
bring you one night, it’s where
I go when I
hang up the phone  ...    
                                      Neither you
nor your soul is waiting for me at
the end of this, I know that, the salt
nearly clear after I
chisel out the pews, the see-through
altar, the opaque
panes of glass that depict the stations of
our cross — Here is the day
we met, here is the day we remember we
met  
Dearest, note how these two are alike: 
This harpsicord pavane by Purcell 
And the racer’s twelve-speed bike. 
The machinery of grace is always simple. 
This chrome trapezoid, one wheel connected 
To another of concentric gears, 
Which Ptolemy dreamt of and Schwinn perfected, 
Is gone. The cyclist, not the cycle, steers. 
And in the playing, Purcell’s chords are played away. 
So this talk, or touch if I were there, 
Should work its effortless gadgetry of love, 
Like Dante’s heaven, and melt into the air. 
If it doesn’t, of course, I’ve fallen. So much is chance, 
So much agility, desire, and feverish care, 
As bicyclists and harpsicordists prove 
Who only by moving can balance, 
Only by balancing move. 
When I have baked white cakes
And grated green almonds to spread upon them; 
When I have picked the green crowns from the strawberries
And piled them, cone-pointed, in a blue and yellow platter;
When I have smoothed the seam of the linen I have been working;
What then?
To-morrow it will be the same:
Cakes and strawberries,
And needles in and out of cloth.
If the sun is beautiful on bricks and pewter,
How much more beautiful is the moon,
Slanting down the gauffered branches of a plum-tree;
The moon, 
Wavering across a bed of tulips; 
The moon,
Still,
Upon your face.
You shine, Beloved,
You and the moon.
But which is the reflection?
The clock is striking eleven.
I think, when we have shut and barred the door,
The night will be dark
Outside. 
I wander thro' each charter'd street, 
Near where the charter'd Thames does flow. 
And mark in every face I meet 
Marks of weakness, marks of woe. 
In every cry of every Man, 
In every Infants cry of fear, 
In every voice: in every ban, 
The mind-forg'd manacles I hear 
How the Chimney-sweepers cry 
Every blackning Church appalls, 
And the hapless Soldiers sigh 
Runs in blood down Palace walls 
But most thro' midnight streets I hear 
How the youthful Harlots curse 
Blasts the new-born Infants tear 
And blights with plagues the Marriage hearse  
How confident I am it is there. Don’t I bring it,   
As if it were enclosed in a fine leather case,   
To particular places solely for its own sake?   
Haven’t I set it down before the variegated canyon   
And the undeviating bald salt dome?   
Don’t I feed it on ivory calcium and ruffled   
Shell bellies, shore boulders, on the sight   
Of the petrel motionless over the sea, its splayed   
Feet hanging? Don’t I make sure it apprehends   
The invisibly fine spray more than once? 
I have seen that it takes in every detail 
I can manage concerning the garden wall and its borders. 
I have listed for it the comings and goings 
Of one hundred species of insects explicitly described. 
I have named the chartreuse stripe 
And the fimbriated antenna, the bulbed thorax   
And the multiple eye. I have sketched 
The brilliant wings of the trumpet vine and invented 
New vocabularies describing the interchanges between rocks   
And their crevices, between the holly lip   
And its concept of itself. 
And if not for its sake, why would I go 
Out into the night alone and stare deliberately   
Straight up into 15 billion years ago and more? 
I have cherished it. I have named it.   
By my own solicitations   
I have proof of its presence. 
If yet I have not all thy love, 
Dear, I shall never have it all; 
I cannot breathe one other sigh, to move, 
Nor can intreat one other tear to fall; 
And all my treasure, which should purchase thee— 
Sighs, tears, and oaths, and letters—I have spent. 
Yet no more can be due to me, 
Than at the bargain made was meant; 
If then thy gift of love were partial, 
That some to me, some should to others fall, 
         Dear, I shall never have thee all. 
Or if then thou gavest me all, 
All was but all, which thou hadst then; 
But if in thy heart, since, there be or shall 
New love created be, by other men, 
Which have their stocks entire, and can in tears, 
In sighs, in oaths, and letters, outbid me, 
This new love may beget new fears, 
For this love was not vow'd by thee. 
And yet it was, thy gift being general; 
The ground, thy heart, is mine; whatever shall 
         Grow there, dear, I should have it all. 
Yet I would not have all yet, 
He that hath all can have no more; 
And since my love doth every day admit 
New growth, thou shouldst have new rewards in store; 
Thou canst not every day give me thy heart, 
If thou canst give it, then thou never gavest it; 
Love's riddles are, that though thy heart depart, 
It stays at home, and thou with losing savest it; 
But we will have a way more liberal, 
Than changing hearts, to join them; so we shall 
         Be one, and one another's all. 
Reptilian green the wrinkled throat,   
Green as a bough of yew the beard;   
He bent his head, and so I smote;   
Then for a thought my vision cleared. 
The head dropped clean; he rose and walked; 
He fixed his fingers in the hair; 
The head was unabashed and talked;   
I understood what I must dare. 
His flesh, cut down, arose and grew.   
He bade me wait the season’s round,   
And then, when he had strength anew,   
To meet him on his native ground. 
The year declined; and in his keep   
I passed in joy a thriving yule;   
And whether waking or in sleep,   
I lived in riot like a fool. 
He beat the woods to bring me meat.   
His lady, like a forest vine, 
Grew in my arms; the growth was sweet;   
And yet what thoughtless force was mine! 
By practice and conviction formed,   
With ancient stubbornness ingrained,   
Although her body clung and swarmed,   
My own identity remained. 
Her beauty, lithe, unholy, pure,   
Took shapes that I had never known;   
And had I once been insecure, 
Had grafted laurel in my bone. 
And then, since I had kept the trust,   
Had loved the lady, yet was true,   
The knight withheld his giant thrust   
And let me go with what I knew. 
I left the green bark and the shade,   
Where growth was rapid, thick, and still;   
I found a road that men had made   
And rested on a drying hill. 
As a boy he had trouble speaking,
past three before a real word preened
from his lips. And for the longest time,
malaprops haunted him. His older sister
did what she could to train the bitten seal
of   his brain to twirl the red ball 
on the nose of eloquence, and his grandmother
tired of   insisting he utter the names
of   toys or foods — for every desire
was coded — and gave him whatever
he grunted and pointed to. 
O, the man then a boy
thought, when I tower among them
I should invent my own speech
and leave others empty and afraid
that they did not know it, could not ask
or plead their case in the one tongue
that mattered. I shall have them
look upon the simplest things,
the man then a boy thought, 
and fill up with stolen awe,
and point with their faces,
their pupils wide as blackened coins,
and hope with all the revenue
shattered heart-glass can muster
that someone had grasped
their need as need and not
as the monstrous coupling
of   sounds in a trance of whims.
Then, the grind of   his teeth
vowed, then the plazas of my city
will fill with my name,
and their blood will matter 
as little to them as to me. 
The mower alone
saw from the median
the cloud come over
the mountain down to trawl
the valley like a whale
and the swifts like water
passing through her white baleen.
The mower alone patrolling
the haw with the hawks
the mountain to swallow
where the sky had been
and where the town had been
pinned by steeples
and hummed electric hubris.
For everyone else
on either side of the narrow
the cloud was only a minute
of a single verse
because the highway treats the blues
as all the same as if Bentonia
were Sunflower County
but the land between the lanes
even while under the blades
sees the power in every cloud
and hears each song spiral out
of an old familiar tune just so
to devour our hearts. 
While one sere leaf, that parting Autumn yields, 
   Trembles upon the thin, and naked spray, 
   November, dragging on this sunless day, 
   Lours, cold and sullen, on the watery fields; 
And Nature to the waste dominion yields, 
   Stripped her last robes, with gold and purple gay — 
   So droops my life, of your soft beams despoiled, 
   Youth, Health, and Hope, that long exulting smiled; 
And the wild carols, and the bloomy hues 
   Of merry Spring-time, spruce on every plain 
   Her half-blown bushes, moist with sunny rain, 
More pensive thoughts in my sunk heart infuse 
   Than Winter’s grey, and desolate domain 
   Faded like my lost Youth, that no bright Spring renews. 
Now you hear what the house has to say.   
Pipes clanking, water running in the dark,   
the mortgaged walls shifting in discomfort,   
and voices mounting in an endless drone 
of small complaints like the sounds of a family   
that year by year you’ve learned how to ignore.
But now you must listen to the things you own,   
all that you’ve worked for these past years,   
the murmur of property, of things in disrepair,   
the moving parts about to come undone,   
and twisting in the sheets remember all 
the faces you could not bring yourself to love. 
How many voices have escaped you until now,   
the venting furnace, the floorboards underfoot,   
the steady accusations of the clock 
numbering the minutes no one will mark.   
The terrible clarity this moment brings,   
the useless insight, the unbroken dark. 
Thou art my lute, by thee I sing,—
      My being is attuned to thee.
 Thou settest all my words a-wing,
      And meltest me to melody.
 Thou art my life, by thee I live,
      From thee proceed the joys I know;
 Sweetheart, thy hand has power to give
      The meed of love—the cup of woe.
 Thou art my love, by thee I lead
      My soul the paths of light along,
 From vale to vale, from mead to mead,
      And home it in the hills of song.
 My song, my soul, my life, my all,
      Why need I pray or make my plea,
 Since my petition cannot fall;
      For I’m already one with thee! 
Oh could I raise the darken’d veil,
Which hides my future life from me,
Could unborn ages slowly sail,
Before my view—and could I see
My every action painted there,
To cast one look I would not dare.
There poverty and grief might stand,
And dark Despair’s corroding hand,
Would make me seek the lonely tomb
To slumber in its endless gloom.
Then let me never cast a look,
Within Fate’s fix’d mysterious book. 
To turn a stone 
with its white squirming 
underneath, to pry the disc 
from the sun’s eclipse—white heat 
coiling in the blinded eye: to these malign   
necessities we come 
from the dim time of dinosaurs 
who crawled like breathing lava 
from the earth’s cracked crust, and swung   
their tiny heads above the lumbering tons   
of flesh, brains no bigger than a fist 
clenched to resist the white flash 
in the sky the day the sun-flares 
pared them down to relics for museums,   
turned glaciers back, seared Sinai’s 
meadows black—the ferns withered, the swamps   
were melted down to molten mud, the cells   
uncoupled, recombined, and madly 
multiplied, huge trees toppled to the ground,   
the slow life there abandoned hope, 
a caterpillar stiffened in the grass. 
Two apes, caught in the act of coupling,   
made a mutant child 
who woke to sunlight wondering, his mother   
torn by the huge new head 
that forced the narrow birth canal. 
As if compelled to repetition   
and to unearth again 
white fire at the heart of matter—fire 
we sought and fire we spoke, 
our thoughts, however elegant, were fire 
from first to last—like sentries set to watch   
at Argos for the signal fire 
passed peak to peak from Troy 
to Nagasaki, triumphant echo of the burning   
city walls and prologue to the murders   
yet to come—we scan the sky 
for that bright flash, 
our eyes stared white from watching   
for the signal fire that ends 
the epic—a cursed line 
with its caesura, a pause 
to signal peace, or a rehearsal 
for the silence. 
In Flanders fields the poppies blow
Between the crosses, row on row,
    That mark our place; and in the sky
    The larks, still bravely singing, fly
Scarce heard amid the guns below.
We are the Dead. Short days ago
We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow,
    Loved and were loved, and now we lie,
        In Flanders fields.
Take up our quarrel with the foe:
To you from failing hands we throw
    The torch; be yours to hold it high.
    If ye break faith with us who die
We shall not sleep, though poppies grow
        In Flanders fields. 
Through the night   
the apples 
outside my window   
one by one let go   
their branches and   
drop to the lawn. 
I can’t see, but hear 
the stem-snap, the plummet 
through leaves, then 
the final thump against the ground. 
Sometimes two   
at once, or one   
right after another. 
During long moments of silence 
I wait 
and wonder about the bruised bodies,   
the terror of diving through air, and   
think I’ll go tomorrow 
to find the newly fallen, but they 
all look alike lying there 
dewsoaked, disappearing before me. 
2. 
I lie beneath my window listening   
to the sound of apples dropping in 
the yard, a syncopated code I long to know, 
which continues even as I sleep, and dream I know 
the meaning of what I hear, each dull   
thud of unseen apple- 
body, the earth   
falling to earth 
once and forever, over   
and over. 
Between my finger and my thumb   
The squat pen rests; snug as a gun. 
Under my window, a clean rasping sound   
When the spade sinks into gravelly ground:   
My father, digging. I look down 
Till his straining rump among the flowerbeds   
Bends low, comes up twenty years away   
Stooping in rhythm through potato drills   
Where he was digging. 
The coarse boot nestled on the lug, the shaft   
Against the inside knee was levered firmly. 
He rooted out tall tops, buried the bright edge deep 
To scatter new potatoes that we picked, 
Loving their cool hardness in our hands. 
By God, the old man could handle a spade.   
Just like his old man. 
My grandfather cut more turf in a day 
Than any other man on Toner’s bog. 
Once I carried him milk in a bottle 
Corked sloppily with paper. He straightened up 
To drink it, then fell to right away 
Nicking and slicing neatly, heaving sods 
Over his shoulder, going down and down 
For the good turf. Digging. 
The cold smell of potato mould, the squelch and slap 
Of soggy peat, the curt cuts of an edge 
Through living roots awaken in my head. 
But I’ve no spade to follow men like them. 
Between my finger and my thumb 
The squat pen rests. 
I’ll dig with it. 
Tell me the way to the wedding
 Tell me the way to the war,
 Tell me the needle you’re threading
 I won’t raise my voice anymore.
 And tell me what axe you are grinding
 Where the boy on the bivouac believes,
 What reel you are unwinding
 For the girl in her bed who grieves.
 While behind a derrick’s girder
 He watches the sinking sun,
 He asks what he’ll do for murder
 And what he will do for fun.
 Will you read him the ways of war
 His Miranda rights in sin,
 Will you tell him what to ignore
 When he studies your discipline?
 He dozes off—but he shakes
 In a dream that he is the one
 Death finds abed and wakes
 Just as the night is done.
 Tell me what boats go ashore
 Riding the oil-dimmed tide,
 Red streamers and black in store
 For the boy with a pain in his side.
 And tell me where they are heading
 Tonight; now tell me the score.
 Tell me the way to their wedding
 I won’t raise my own voice anymore. 
When summer ended 
the leaves of snapdragons withered 
taking their shrill-colored mouths with them. 
They were still, so quiet. They were 
violet where umber now is. She hated 
and she hated to see 
them go. Flowers 
born when the weather was good - this 
she thinks of, watching the branch of peaches 
daring their ways above the fence, and further, 
two hummingbirds, hovering, stuck to each other, 
arcing their bodies in grim determination 
to find what is good, what is 
given them to find. These are warriors 
distancing themselves from history. 
They find peace 
in the way they contain the wind 
and are gone. 
You saved me, you should remember me. 
The spring of the year; young men buying tickets for the ferryboats. 
Laughter, because the air is full of apple blossoms. 
When I woke up, I realized I was capable of the same feeling. 
I remember sounds like that from my childhood,   
laughter for no cause, simply because the world is beautiful, 
something like that. 
Lugano. Tables under the apple trees. 
Deckhands raising and lowering the colored flags. 
And by the lake’s edge, a young man throws his hat into the water; 
perhaps his sweetheart has accepted him. 
Crucial 
sounds or gestures like 
a track laid down before the larger themes 
and then unused, buried. 
Islands in the distance. My mother   
holding out a plate of little cakes— 
as far as I remember, changed 
in no detail, the moment 
vivid, intact, having never been 
exposed to light, so that I woke elated, at my age   
hungry for life, utterly confident— 
By the tables, patches of new grass, the pale green   
pieced into the dark existing ground. 
Surely spring has been returned to me, this time   
not as a lover but a messenger of death, yet   
it is still spring, it is still meant tenderly. 
A moth lies open and lies
like an old bleached beech leaf,
a lean-to between window frame and sill. 
Its death protects a collection of tinier deaths 
and other dirts beneath.
Although the white paint is water-stained, 
on it death is dirt, and hapless.
The just-severed tiger lily 
is drinking its glass of water, I hope.
This hope is sere.
This hope is severe.
What you ruin ruins you, too
and so you hope for favor.
I mean I do.
The underside of a ladybug 
wanders the window. I wander
the continent, my undercarriage not as evident,
so go more perilously, it seems to me.
But I am only me; to you it seems clear
I mean to disappear, and am mean
and project on you some ancient fear.
If I were a bug, I hope I wouldn’t be
this giant winged thing, spindly like a crane fly,
skinny-legged like me, kissing the cold ceiling, 
fumbling for the face of the other, seeking.
It came in with me last night when I turned on the light.
I lay awake, afraid it would touch my face.
It wants out. I want out, too.
Batter my heart, three-person'd God, for you 
As yet but knock, breathe, shine, and seek to mend; 
That I may rise and stand, o'erthrow me, and bend 
Your force to break, blow, burn, and make me new. 
I, like an usurp'd town to another due, 
Labor to admit you, but oh, to no end; 
Reason, your viceroy in me, me should defend, 
But is captiv'd, and proves weak or untrue. 
Yet dearly I love you, and would be lov'd fain, 
But am betroth'd unto your enemy; 
Divorce me, untie or break that knot again, 
Take me to you, imprison me, for I, 
Except you enthrall me, never shall be free, 
Nor ever chaste, except you ravish me. 
It is more onerous 
than the rites of beauty 
or housework, harder than love. 
But you expect it of me casually, 
the way you expect the sun 
to come up, not in spite of rain 
or clouds but because of them. 
And so I smile, as if my own fidelity 
to sadness were a hidden vice— 
that downward tug on my mouth, 
my old suspicion that health 
and love are brief irrelevancies, 
no more than laughter in the warm dark 
strangled at dawn. 
Happiness. I try to hoist it 
on my narrow shoulders again— 
a knapsack heavy with gold coins. 
I stumble around the house,   
bump into things. 
Only Midas himself 
would understand. 
I summon up Panofskv from his bed   
    Among the famous dead 
To build a tomb which, since I am not read,   
Suffers the stone’s mortality instead; 
Which, by the common iconographies   
    Of simple visual ease, 
Usurps the place of the complexities 
Of sound survivors once preferred to noise: 
Monkeys fixed on one bough, an almost holy   
    Nightmarish sloth, a tree 
Of parrots in a pride of family, 
Immortal skunks, unaromatically; 
Some deaf bats in a cave, a porcupine   
    Quill-less, a superfine 
Flightless eagle, and, after them, a line   
Of geese, unnavigating by design; 
Dogs in the frozen haloes of their barks,   
    A hundred porous arks 
Aground and lost, where elephants like quarks   
Ape mother mules or imitation sharks— 
And each of them half-venerated by   
    A mob, impartially 
Scaled, finned, or feathered, all before a dry   
Unable mouth, symmetrically awry. 
But how shall I, in my brief space, describe   
    A tomb so vast, a tribe 
So desperately existent for a scribe 
Knowingly of the fashions’ diatribe, 
I who have sought time’s memory afoot,   
    Grateful for every root 
Of trees that fill the garden with their fruit,   
Their fragrance and their shade? Even as I do it, 
I see myself unnoticed on the stair 
    That, underneath a clear 
Welcome of bells, had promised me a fair   
Attentive hearing’s joy, sometime, somewhere. 
Hurricanes, 2005
 Arlene learned to dance backwards in heels that were too high.
 Bret prayed for a shaggy mustache made of mud and hair.
 Cindy just couldn’t keep her windy legs together.
 Dennis never learned to swim.
 Emily whispered her gusts into a thousand skins.
Franklin, farsighted and anxious, bumbled villages.
 Gert spat her matronly name against a city’s flat face.
 Harvey hurled a wailing child high.
 Irene, the baby girl, threw pounding tantrums.
 José liked the whip sound of slapping.
 Lee just craved the whip.
 Maria’s thunder skirts flew high when she danced.
 Nate was mannered and practical. He stormed precisely.
 Ophelia nibbled weirdly on the tips of depressions.
 Philippe slept too late, flailing on a wronged ocean.
 Rita was a vicious flirt. She woke Philippe with rumors.
 Stan was born business, a gobbler of steel.
 Tammy crooned country, getting the words all wrong.
 Vince died before anyone could remember his name.
 Wilma opened her maw wide, flashing rot.
 None of them talked about Katrina.
 She was their odd sister,
 the blood dazzler. 
The lords of life, the lords of life,—
I saw them pass,
In their own guise,
Like and unlike,
Portly and grim,—
Use and Surprise,
Surface and Dream,
Succession swift and spectral Wrong,
Temperament without a tongue,
And the inventor of the game
Omnipresent without name;—
Some to see, some to be guessed,
They marched from east to west:
Little man, least of all,
Among the legs of his guardians tall,
Walked about with puzzled look.
Him by the hand dear Nature took,
Dearest Nature, strong and kind,
Whispered, ‘Darling, never mind!
To-morrow they will wear another face,
The founder thou; these are thy race!’
A BOAT beneath a sunny sky, 
Lingering onward dreamily 
In an evening of July — 
Children three that nestle near, 
Eager eye and willing ear, 
Pleased a simple tale to hear — 
Long has paled that sunny sky: 
Echoes fade and memories die: 
Autumn frosts have slain July. 
Still she haunts me, phantomwise, 
Alice moving under skies 
Never seen by waking eyes. 
Children yet, the tale to hear, 
Lovingly shall nestle near. 
In a Wonderland they lie, 
Dreaming as the days go by, 
Dreaming as the summers die: 
Ever drifting down the stream — 
Lingering in the golden gleam — 
Life, what is it but a dream? 
Instead of a cup of tea, instead of a milk- 
silk whelk of a cup, of a cup of nearly six 
o'clock teatime, cup of a stumbling block, 
cup of an afternoon unredeemed by talk, 
cup of a cut brown loaf, of a slice, a lack 
of butter, blueberry jam that's almost black, 
instead of tannin seeping into the cracks 
of a pot, the void of an hour seeps out, infects 
the slit of a cut I haven't the wit to fix 
with a surgeon's needle threaded with fine-gauge silk 
as a key would thread the cylinder of a lock. 
But no key threads the cylinder of a lock. 
Late afternoon light, transitory, licks 
the place of the absent cup with its rough tongue, flicks 
itself out beneath the wheel's revolving spoke. 
Taut thought's gone, with a blink of attention, slack, 
a vision of "death and distance in the mix" 
(she lost her words and how did she get them back 
when the corridor of a day was a lurching deck? 
The dream-life logic encodes in nervous tics 
she translated to a syntax which connects 
intense and unfashionable politics 
with morning coffee, Hudson sunsets, sex; 
then the short-circuit of the final stroke, 
the end toward which all lines looped out, then broke). 
What a gaze out the window interjects: 
on the southeast corner, a black Lab balks, 
tugged as the light clicks green toward a late-day walk 
by a plump brown girl in a purple anorak. 
The Bronx-bound local comes rumbling up the tracks 
out of the tunnel, over west Harlem blocks 
whose windows gleam on the animal warmth of bricks 
rouged by the fluvial light of six o'clock. 
They staunched the wound with a stone.
They drew blue venom from his blood 
            until there was none.
When his veins ran true his face remained 
lifeless and all the mothers of the village 
wept and pounded their chests until the sky 
             had little choice 
but to grant their supplications. God made 
             the boy breathe again.
God breathes life into us, it is said,
only once. But this case was an exception. 
God drew back in a giant gust and blew life into the boy
and like a stranded fish, he shuddered, oceanless.
It was true: the boy lived. 
He lived for a very long time. The toxins 
were an oil slick: contaminated, cleaned.
But just as soon as the women
kissed redness back into his cheeks
the boy began to die again.
He continued to die for the rest of   his life.
The dying took place slowly, sweetly.
The dying took a very long time. 
the remnant of a vast, oceanic
bruise (wound delivered early and long ago)
was in you purity and 
sweetness self-gathered, CHOSEN
                                • 
When I tried to find words for the moral sense that unifies
and sweetens the country voices in your collage The Friendly Way,
you said It's a code.
You were a code
I yearned to decipher.—
In the end, the plague that full swift runs by
took you, broke you;—
                                           in the end, could not
                                           take you, did not break you—
you had somehow erased within you not only
meanness, but anger, the desire to punish
the universe for everything
not achieved, not tasted, seen again, touched—;
. . . the undecipherable
code unbroken even as the soul
learns once again the body it loves and hates is
made of earth, and will betray it.
Whose woods these are I think I know.   
His house is in the village though;   
He will not see me stopping here   
To watch his woods fill up with snow.   
My little horse must think it queer   
To stop without a farmhouse near   
Between the woods and frozen lake   
The darkest evening of the year.   
He gives his harness bells a shake   
To ask if there is some mistake.   
The only other sound’s the sweep   
Of easy wind and downy flake.   
The woods are lovely, dark and deep,   
But I have promises to keep,   
And miles to go before I sleep,   
And miles to go before I sleep. 
Elm branches radiate green heat, 
blackbirds stiffly strut across fields. 
Beneath bedroom wood floor, I feel earth— 
bread in an oven that slowly swells, 
simmering my Navajo blanket thread-crust 
as white-feathered and corn-tasseled 
Corn Dancers rise in a line, follow my calf, 
vanish in a rumple and surface at my knee-cliff, 
chanting. Wearing shagged buffalo headgear, 
Buffalo Dancer chases Deer Woman across 
Sleeping Leg mountain. Branches of wild rose 
trees rattle seeds. Deer Woman fades into hills 
of beige background. Red Bird 
of my heart thrashes wildly after her. 
What a stupid man I have been! 
How good to let imagination go, 
step over worrisome events, 
                               those hacked logs 
                               tumbled about 
                               in the driveway. 
Let decisions go! 
                               Let them blow 
                               like school children’s papers 
                               against the fence, 
                               rattling in the afternoon wind. 
This Red Bird 
of my heart thrashes within the tidy appearance 
I offer the world, 
topples what I erect, snares what I set free, 
dashes what I’ve put together, 
indulges in things left unfinished, 
and my world is left, as children know, 
                               left as toys after dark in the sandbox. 
The pure products of America 
go crazy— 
mountain folk from Kentucky 
or the ribbed north end of 
Jersey 
with its isolate lakes and 
valleys, its deaf-mutes, thieves 
old names 
and promiscuity between 
devil-may-care men who have taken 
to railroading 
out of sheer lust of adventure— 
and young slatterns, bathed 
in filth 
from Monday to Saturday 
to be tricked out that night 
with gauds 
from imaginations which have no 
peasant traditions to give them 
character 
but flutter and flaunt 
sheer rags—succumbing without 
emotion 
save numbed terror 
under some hedge of choke-cherry 
or viburnum— 
which they cannot express— 
Unless it be that marriage 
perhaps 
with a dash of Indian blood 
will throw up a girl so desolate 
so hemmed round 
with disease or murder 
that she'll be rescued by an 
agent— 
reared by the state and 
sent out at fifteen to work in 
some hard-pressed 
house in the suburbs— 
some doctor's family, some Elsie— 
voluptuous water 
expressing with broken 
brain the truth about us— 
her great 
ungainly hips and flopping breasts 
addressed to cheap 
jewelry 
and rich young men with fine eyes 
as if the earth under our feet 
were 
an excrement of some sky 
and we degraded prisoners 
destined 
to hunger until we eat filth 
while the imagination strains 
after deer 
going by fields of goldenrod in 
the stifling heat of September 
Somehow 
it seems to destroy us 
It is only in isolate flecks that 
something 
is given off 
No one 
to witness 
and adjust, no one to drive the car 
There’s blue, and then there’s blue.
A number, not a hue, this blue
is not the undertone of any one
but there it is, primary.
I held the bouquet
in shock and cut the stems at a deadly angle.
I opened the toxic sachet of flower food
with my canine and rinsed my mouth.
I used to wash my hands and daydream.
I dreamed of myself and washed
my hands of everything. Easy math.
Now I can’t get their procedure
at the florist off my mind.
The white flowers arrived! They overnighted
in a chemical bath
and now they have a fake laugh
that catches like a match
that starts the kind of kitchen fire
that is fanned by water.
They won’t even look at me.
Happy Anniversary. 
The fork lived with the knife
      and found it hard — for years
 took nicks and scratches,
      not to mention cuts.
 She who took tedium by the ears:
      nonforthcoming pickles,
 defiant stretched-out lettuce,
      sauce-gooed particles.
 He who came down whack.
 His conversation, even, edged.
 Lying beside him in the drawer
      she formed a crazy patina.
 The seasons stacked — 
      melons, succeeded by cured pork.
 He dulled; he was a dull knife,
 while she was, after all, a fork. 
(Lines on the loss of the "Titanic")I 
            In a solitude of the sea 
            Deep from human vanity, 
And the Pride of Life that planned her, stilly couches she. 
            Steel chambers, late the pyres 
            Of her salamandrine fires, 
Cold currents thrid, and turn to rhythmic tidal lyres. 
III 
            Over the mirrors meant 
            To glass the opulent 
The sea-worm crawls — grotesque, slimed, dumb, indifferent. 
IV 
            Jewels in joy designed 
            To ravish the sensuous mind 
Lie lightless, all their sparkles bleared and black and blind. 
V 
            Dim moon-eyed fishes near 
            Gaze at the gilded gear 
And query: "What does this vaingloriousness down here?" ... 
VI 
            Well: while was fashioning 
            This creature of cleaving wing, 
The Immanent Will that stirs and urges everything 
VII 
            Prepared a sinister mate 
            For her — so gaily great — 
A Shape of Ice, for the time far and dissociate. 
VIII 
            And as the smart ship grew 
            In stature, grace, and hue, 
In shadowy silent distance grew the Iceberg too. 
IX 
            Alien they seemed to be; 
            No mortal eye could see 
The intimate welding of their later history, 
X 
            Or sign that they were bent 
            By paths coincident 
On being anon twin halves of one august event, 
XI 
            Till the Spinner of the Years 
            Said "Now!" And each one hears, 
And consummation comes, and jars two hemispheres. 
You might come here Sunday on a whim.   
Say your life broke down. The last good kiss   
you had was years ago. You walk these streets   
laid out by the insane, past hotels   
that didn’t last, bars that did, the tortured try   
of local drivers to accelerate their lives.   
Only churches are kept up. The jail   
turned 70 this year. The only prisoner   
is always in, not knowing what he’s done. 
The principal supporting business now   
is rage. Hatred of the various grays   
the mountain sends, hatred of the mill,   
The Silver Bill repeal, the best liked girls   
who leave each year for Butte. One good   
restaurant and bars can’t wipe the boredom out.   
The 1907 boom, eight going silver mines,   
a dance floor built on springs— 
all memory resolves itself in gaze, 
in panoramic green you know the cattle eat   
or two stacks high above the town,   
two dead kilns, the huge mill in collapse   
for fifty years that won’t fall finally down. 
Isn’t this your life? That ancient kiss 
still burning out your eyes? Isn’t this defeat 
so accurate, the church bell simply seems 
a pure announcement: ring and no one comes?   
Don’t empty houses ring? Are magnesium   
and scorn sufficient to support a town,   
not just Philipsburg, but towns 
of towering blondes, good jazz and booze   
the world will never let you have 
until the town you came from dies inside? 
Say no to yourself. The old man, twenty   
when the jail was built, still laughs   
although his lips collapse. Someday soon,   
he says, I’ll go to sleep and not wake up.   
You tell him no. You’re talking to yourself.   
The car that brought you here still runs.   
The money you buy lunch with, 
no matter where it’s mined, is silver   
and the girl who serves your food 
is slender and her red hair lights the wall. 
Reading in the paper a summary 
of a five-year psychological study 
that shows those perceived as most beautiful   
are treated differently, 
I think they could have just asked me, 
If but some vengeful god would call to me 
From up the sky, and laugh: “Thou suffering thing, 
Know that thy sorrow is my ecstasy, 
That thy love's loss is my hate's profiting!” 
Then would I bear it, clench myself, and die, 
Steeled by the sense of ire unmerited; 
Half-eased in that a Powerfuller than I 
Had willed and meted me the tears I shed. 
But not so.   How arrives it joy lies slain, 
And why unblooms the best hope ever sown? 
—Crass Casualty obstructs the sun and rain, 
And dicing Time for gladness casts a moan. . . . 
These purblind Doomsters had as readily strown 
Blisses about my pilgrimage as pain. 
Go to the western gate, Luke Havergal, 
There where the vines cling crimson on the wall, 
And in the twilight wait for what will come. 
The leaves will whisper there of her, and some, 
Like flying words, will strike you as they fall; 
But go, and if you listen she will call. 
Go to the western gate, Luke Havergal— 
Luke Havergal. 
No, there is not a dawn in eastern skies 
To rift the fiery night that’s in your eyes; 
But there, where western glooms are gathering, 
The dark will end the dark, if anything: 
God slays Himself with every leaf that flies, 
And hell is more than half of paradise. 
No, there is not a dawn in eastern skies— 
In eastern skies. 
Out of a grave I come to tell you this, 
Out of a grave I come to quench the kiss 
That flames upon your forehead with a glow 
That blinds you to the way that you must go. 
Yes, there is yet one way to where she is, 
Bitter, but one that faith may never miss. 
Out of a grave I come to tell you this— 
To tell you this. 
There is the western gate, Luke Havergal, 
There are the crimson leaves upon the wall. 
Go, for the winds are tearing them away,— 
Nor think to riddle the dead words they say, 
Nor any more to feel them as they fall; 
But go, and if you trust her she will call. 
There is the western gate, Luke Havergal— 
‘Is there anybody there?’ said the Traveller,   
   Knocking on the moonlit door; 
And his horse in the silence champed the grasses   
   Of the forest’s ferny floor: 
And a bird flew up out of the turret,   
   Above the Traveller’s head: 
And he smote upon the door again a second time;   
   ‘Is there anybody there?’ he said. 
But no one descended to the Traveller;   
   No head from the leaf-fringed sill 
Leaned over and looked into his grey eyes,   
   Where he stood perplexed and still. 
But only a host of phantom listeners   
   That dwelt in the lone house then 
Stood listening in the quiet of the moonlight   
   To that voice from the world of men: 
Stood thronging the faint moonbeams on the dark stair,   
   That goes down to the empty hall, 
Hearkening in an air stirred and shaken   
   By the lonely Traveller’s call. 
And he felt in his heart their strangeness,   
   Their stillness answering his cry, 
While his horse moved, cropping the dark turf,   
   ’Neath the starred and leafy sky; 
For he suddenly smote on the door, even   
   Louder, and lifted his head:— 
‘Tell them I came, and no one answered,   
   That I kept my word,’ he said. 
Never the least stir made the listeners,   
   Though every word he spake 
Fell echoing through the shadowiness of the still house   
   From the one man left awake: 
Ay, they heard his foot upon the stirrup,   
   And the sound of iron on stone, 
And how the silence surged softly backward,   
   When the plunging hoofs were gone. 
Time does not bring relief; you all have lied   
Who told me time would ease me of my pain!   
I miss him in the weeping of the rain;   
I want him at the shrinking of the tide; 
The old snows melt from every mountain-side,   
And last year’s leaves are smoke in every lane;   
But last year’s bitter loving must remain 
Heaped on my heart, and my old thoughts abide.   
There are a hundred places where I fear   
To go,—so with his memory they brim.   
And entering with relief some quiet place   
Where never fell his foot or shone his face   
I say, “There is no memory of him here!”   
And so stand stricken, so remembering him. 
      1
Take your boulevards, your Locust Street, 
Your Chestnut, Pine, your Olive,
Take your Forest Park and Shaw’s Garden,
Your avenues that lead past street-corner violence, 
Past your West End, past your Limit, 
To shabby suburban crime,
Vandalism in the parking-lot,
Abductions from the shopping mall
Like making the same mistake over and over 
On the piano or typewriter keys, 
Always hitting the wrong note
How “very alive, very American” 
They are, how chockful of metaphysics, 
Hellbent to obliterate the wilderness.
      2
Learn to live with sycamores,
Their sad, peeling trunks, scabbed all over 
With shabby patches, their enormous leaves
In dingy shades of ochre and dun 
Rattling like castanets, their roots 
Thick as a man’s leg, crawling
Like enormous worms out of the broken pavements, 
Continually thrusting themselves up 
From pools of shade they make, 
Sculpturing the street
With dappled dark and light
As glaucoma, a disease of the eye, 
Makes the world more beautiful 
With its mysterious rainbows.
      3
Already in Iowa the monarchs are emerging, 
Signaling with their tawny wings; 
In regalia of burnt orange and umber 
The spangled imperial procession 
Meanders along the democratic roadsides, 
Across straight state lines,
Over rivers and artificial lakes
And the loneliness of middle America 
On the way to Mexico.
The tiny wind of their passing
Is not even recorded
As a disturbance in the atmosphere.
      4
Driving back into the American past,
Homesick for forests, flowers without names, vast savannahs, 
Lowlands or mountains teeming with game,
Bluffs crowned with cottonwoods, mudbanks
Where crocodiles might sun themselves;
Finding instead the remains of strange picnics,
Replications of old selves, a cacophony of changes 
Like a room crowded with chairs
In which no one can sit, as if history were furniture 
Grown splintered and shabby;
Studying a picturesque rustic architecture
To master its splendid abstractions,
Shady verandas and porches,
Or the republican simplicity of a cow. 
Loaf after loaf, in several sizes, 
and never does it not look fresh, 
as though its insides weren’t moist 
or warm crust not the kind that spices 
a room with the plump aroma of toast. 
Found on the table; among shadows 
next to the kitchen phone; dispatched 
FedEx (without return address, though). 
Someone, possibly more than one 
person, loves me. Well then, who? 
Amazing that bread should be so weightless, 
down-light when handled, as a me 
dying to taste it takes a slice. 
Which lasts just long enough to reach 
my mouth, but then, at the first bite, 
Nothing! Nothing but air, thin air ....    
Oh. One more loaf of wonderbread, 
only a pun for bread, seductive 
visually, but you could starve. 
Get rid of it, throw it in the river— 
Beyond which, grain fields. Future food for the just 
and the unjust, those who love, and do not love. 
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow.   
I feel my fate in what I cannot fear.   
I learn by going where I have to go. 
We think by feeling. What is there to know?   
I hear my being dance from ear to ear.   
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow. 
Of those so close beside me, which are you?   
God bless the Ground!   I shall walk softly there,   
And learn by going where I have to go. 
Light takes the Tree; but who can tell us how?   
The lowly worm climbs up a winding stair;   
Great Nature has another thing to do   
To you and me; so take the lively air,   
And, lovely, learn by going where to go. 
This shaking keeps me steady. I should know.   
What falls away is always. And is near.   
The skin ripples over my body like moon-wooed water,
rearing to escape me. Where could it find another
animal as naked as the one it hates to cover?
Once it told me what was happening outside,
who was attacking, who caressing, and what the air
was doing to feed or freeze me. Now I wake up
dark at night, in a textureless ocean of ignorance,
or fruit bites back and water bruises like a stone.
It’s jealousy, because I look for other tools to know
with, and other armor, better girded to my wish.
So let it lie, turn off the clues or try to leave:
sewn on me seamless like those painful shirts
the body-hating saints wore, the sheath of hell
is pierced to my darkness nonetheless: what traitors
labor in my face, what hints they smuggle through
its arching guard! But even in the night it jails,
with nothing but its lies and silences to feed upon,
the jail itself can make a scenery, sing prison songs,
and set off fireworks to praise a homemade day. 
The sea bit,
As they said it would,
And the hill slid,
And the poor dead
Nodded agog
The poor head.
O topmost lofty
Tower of Troy,
The poem apparently
Speaks with joy
Of terrible things.
Where is the pleasure
The poetry brings?
Tell if you can,
What does it make?
A city of man
That will not shake,
Or if it shake,
Shake with the splendor
Of the poem’s pleasure.
To make a final conquest of all me, 
Love did compose so sweet an enemy, 
In whom both beauties to my death agree, 
Joining themselves in fatal harmony; 
That while she with her eyes my heart does bind, 
She with her voice might captivate my mind. 
I could have fled from one but singly fair, 
My disentangled soul itself might save, 
Breaking the curled trammels of her hair. 
But how should I avoid to be her slave, 
Whose subtle art invisibly can wreath 
My fetters of the very air I breathe? 
It had been easy fighting in some plain, 
Where victory might hang in equal choice, 
But all resistance against her is vain, 
Who has th’advantage both of eyes and voice, 
And all my forces needs must be undone, 
She having gained both the wind and sun. 
This little vault, this narrow room, 
Of Love, and Beauty, is the tomb; 
The dawning beam that gan to clear 
Our clouded sky, lies darken'd here, 
Forever set to us, by death 
Sent to inflame the world beneath. 
'Twas but a bud, yet did contain 
More sweetness than shall spring again; 
A budding star that might have grown 
Into a sun, when it had blown. 
This hopeful beauty did create 
New life in Love's declining state; 
But now his empire ends, and we 
From fire and wounding darts are free; 
His brand, his bow, let no man fear, 
The flames, the arrows, all lie here. 
These little limbs, 
    These eyes and hands which here I find, 
These rosy cheeks wherewith my life begins, 
    Where have ye been? behind 
What curtain were ye from me hid so long? 
Where was, in what abyss, my speaking tongue? 
         When silent I   
    So many thousand, thousand years 
Beneath the dust did in a chaos lie, 
    How could I smiles or tears, 
Or lips or hands or eyes or ears perceive? 
Welcome ye treasures which I now receive. 
         I that so long 
    Was nothing from eternity, 
Did little think such joys as ear or tongue 
    To celebrate or see: 
Such sounds to hear, such hands to feel, such feet, 
Beneath the skies on such a ground to meet. 
         New burnished joys, 
    Which yellow gold and pearls excel! 
Such sacred treasures are the limbs in boys, 
    In which a soul doth dwell; 
Their organizèd joints and azure veins 
More wealth include than all the world contains. 
         From dust I rise, 
    And out of nothing now awake; 
These brighter regions which salute mine eyes, 
    A gift from God I take. 
The earth, the seas, the light, the day, the skies, 
The sun and stars are mine if those I prize. 
         Long time before 
    I in my mother’s womb was born, 
A God, preparing, did this glorious store, 
    The world, for me adorn. 
Into this Eden so divine and fair, 
So wide and bright, I come His son and heir. 
         A stranger here 
    Strange things doth meet, strange glories see; 
Strange treasures lodged in this fair world appear, 
    Strange all and new to me; 
But that they mine should be, who nothing was, 
That strangest is of all, yet brought to pass. 
I placed a jar in Tennessee, 
And round it was, upon a hill. 
It made the slovenly wilderness 
Surround that hill. 
The wilderness rose up to it, 
And sprawled around, no longer wild. 
The jar was round upon the ground 
And tall and of a port in air. 
It took dominion everywhere. 
The jar was gray and bare. 
It did not give of bird or bush, 
Like nothing else in Tennessee. 
On her Son H.P. at St. Syth’s Church where her body also lies interredWhat on Earth deserves our trust?
Youth and Beauty both are dust.
Long we gathering are with pain,
What one moment calls again.
Seven years childless marriage past,
A Son, a son is born at last:
So exactly lim’d and fair,
Full of good Spirits, Meen, and Air,
As a long life promised,
Yet, in less than six weeks dead.
Too promising, too great a mind
In so small room to be confined:
Therefore, as fit in Heaven to dwell,
He quickly broke the Prison shell.
So the subtle Alchemist,
Can’t with Hermes Seal resist
The powerful spirit’s subtler flight,
But t’will bid him long good night.
And so the Sun if it arise
Half so glorious as his Eyes,
Like this Infant, takes a shrowd,
Buried in a morning Cloud. 
If I should die, think only this of me: 
      That there’s some corner of a foreign field 
That is for ever England. There shall be 
      In that rich earth a richer dust concealed; 
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware, 
      Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam; 
A body of England’s, breathing English air, 
      Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home. 
And think, this heart, all evil shed away, 
      A pulse in the eternal mind, no less 
            Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given; 
Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day; 
      And laughter, learnt of friends; and gentleness, 
            In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.
Poetry Out Loud Note: This poem has had two titles: “The Soldier” and “Nineteen-Fourteen: The Soldier”. The student may give either title during the recitation. 
I have not ever seen my father’s grave. 
Not that his judgment eyes 
have been forgotten 
nor his great hands’ print 
on our evening doorknobs 
            one half turn each night 
            and he would come 
            drabbled with the world’s business   
            massive and silent 
            as the whole day’s wish   
            ready to redefine 
            each of our shapes 
but now the evening doorknobs   
wait    and do not recognize us   
as we pass. 
Each week a different woman   
regular as his one quick glass 
each evening 
pulls up the grass his stillness grows   
calling it weed. 
Each week    a different woman   
has my mother’s face 
and he 
who time has    changeless 
must be amazed 
who knew and loved 
but one. 
My father died in silence   
loving creation 
and well-defined response   
he lived    still judgments   
on familiar things 
and died    knowing 
a January 15th that year me. 
Lest I go into dust 
Echo that loved hid within a wood   
Would to herself rehearse her weary woe:   
O, she cried, and all the rest unsaid   
Identical came back in sorry echo. 
Echo for the fix that she was in 
Invisible, distraught by mocking passion,   
Passionate, ignored, as good as dumb,   
Employed that O unchanged in repetition. 
Shun love if you suspect that he shuns you,   
Use with him no reproaches whatsoever.   
Ever you knew, supposing him to know 
No melody from which you might recover- 
Cover your ears, dear Echo, do not hear.   
Here is no supplication but your own,   
Only your sighs return upon the air 
Ere their music from the mouth be gone. 
A man steps out of sunlight, 
sunlight that streams like grace, 
still gaping at blue sky 
staked across the emptiness of space, 
into a history where shadows 
assume a human face. 
A man slips into silence 
that began as a cry,
still trailing music 
although reduced to the sigh 
of an accordion 
as it folds into its case. 
When love was a question, the message arrived 
in the beak of a wire and plaster bird. The coloratura   
was hardly to be believed. For flight, 
it took three stagehands: two 
on the pulleys and one on the flute. And you   
thought fancy rained like grace. 
Our fog machine lost in the Parcel Post, we improvised   
with smoke. The heroine dies of tuberculosis after all.   
Remorse and the raw night air: any plausible tenor 
might cough. The passions, I take my clues 
from an obvious source, may be less like climatic events   
than we conventionalize, though I’ve heard 
of tornadoes that break the second-best glassware   
and leave everything else untouched.   
There’s a finer conviction than seamlessness 
elicits: the Greeks knew a god 
by the clanking behind his descent. 
The heart, poor pump, protests till you’d think 
it’s rusted past redemption, but 
there’s tuning in these counterweights,   
celebration’s assembled voice. 
Pavement slipp’ry, people sneezing, 
Lords in ermine, beggars freezing; 
Titled gluttons dainties carving, 
Genius in a garret starving. 
Lofty mansions, warm and spacious; 
Courtiers cringing and voracious; 
Misers scarce the wretched heeding; 
Gallant soldiers fighting, bleeding. 
Wives who laugh at passive spouses; 
Theatres, and meeting-houses; 
Balls, where simp’ring misses languish; 
Hospitals, and groans of anguish. 
Arts and sciences bewailing; 
Commerce drooping, credit failing; 
Placemen mocking subjects loyal; 
Separations, weddings royal. 
Authors who can’t earn a dinner; 
Many a subtle rogue a winner; 
Fugitives for shelter seeking; 
Misers hoarding, tradesmen breaking. 
Taste and talents quite deserted; 
All the laws of truth perverted; 
Arrogance o’er merit soaring; 
Merit silently deploring. 
Ladies gambling night and morning; 
Fools the works of genius scorning; 
Ancient dames for girls mistaken, 
Youthful damsels quite forsaken. 
Some in luxury delighting; 
More in talking than in fighting; 
Lovers old, and beaux decrepid; 
Lordlings empty and insipid. 
Poets, painters, and musicians; 
Lawyers, doctors, politicians: 
Pamphlets, newspapers, and odes, 
Seeking fame by diff’rent roads. 
Gallant souls with empty purses; 
Gen’rals only fit for nurses; 
School-boys, smit with martial spirit, 
Taking place of vet’ran merit. 
Honest men who can’t get places, 
Knaves who shew unblushing faces; 
Ruin hasten’d, peace retarded; 
Candor spurn’d, and art rewarded. 
When I was a child I knew red miners
dressed raggedly and wearing carbide lamps.
I saw them come down red hills to their camps
dyed with red dust from old Ishkooda mines.
Night after night I met them on the roads,
or on the streets in town I caught their glance;
the swing of dinner buckets in their hands,
and grumbling undermining all their words.
I also lived in low cotton country
where moonlight hovered over ripe haystacks,
or stumps of trees, and croppers’ rotting shacks
with famine, terror, flood, and plague near by;
where sentiment and hatred still held sway
and only bitter land was washed away. 
Sunday, September Sunday ... Outdoors, 
Like an early page from The Appalachian Book of the Dead,   
Sunlight lavishes brilliance on every surface, 
Doves settle, surreptitious angels, on tree limb and box branch,   
A crow calls, deep in its own darkness, 
Something like water ticks on 
Just there, beyond the horizon, just there, steady clock ... 
Go in fear of abstractions ... 
                                                       Well, possibly. Meanwhile, 
They are the strata our bodies rise through, the sere veins   
Our skins rub off on. 
For instance, whatever enlightenment there might be   
Housels compassion and affection, those two tributaries   
That river above our lives, 
Whose waters we sense the sense of 
                                                                   late at night, and later still. 
Uneasy, suburbanized, 
I drift from the lawn chair to the back porch to the dwarf orchard   
Testing the grass and border garden. 
A stillness, as in the passageways of Paradise, 
Bell jars the afternoon. 
                                            Leaves, like ex votos, hang hard and shine   
Under the endlessness of heaven. 
Such skeletal altars, such vacant sanctuary. 
It always amazes me 
How landscape recalibrates the stations of the dead, 
How what we see jacks up 
                                                  the odd quotient of what we don’t see,   
How God’s breath reconstitutes our walking up and walking down.   
First glimpse of autumn, stretched tight and snicked, a bad face lift, 
Flicks in and flicks out, 
                                            a virtual reality. 
Time to begin the long division. 
People pray to each other. The way I say "you" to someone else,  respectfully, intimately, desperately. The way someone says  "you" to me, hopefully, expectantly, intensely ... —Huub Oosterhuis You       who I don’t know       I don’t know how to talk to you   
—What is it like for you there? 
Here ... well, wanting solitude; and talk; friendship— 
The uses of solitude. To imagine; to hear. 
Learning braille. To imagine other solitudes. 
But they will not be mine; 
to wait, in the quiet; not to scatter the voices— 
What are you afraid of? 
What will happen. All this leaving. And meetings, yes. But death.   
What happens when you die? 
“... not scatter the voices,” 
Drown out. Not make a house, out of my own words. To be quiet in   
another throat; other eyes; listen for what it is like there. What   
word. What silence. Allowing. Uncertain: to drift, in the 
restlessness ... Repose. To run like water— 
What is it like there, right now? 
Listen: the crowding of the street; the room. Everyone hunches in   
against the crowding; holding their breath: against dread. 
What do you dread? 
What do you dread, in this room, now? 
Not listening. Now. Not watching. Safe inside my own skin. 
To die, not having listened. Not having asked ... To have scattered   
life. 
Yes I know: the thread you have to keep finding, over again, to   
follow it back to life; I know. Impossible, sometimes. 
Back when the earth was new 
and heaven just a whisper, 
back when the names of things 
hadn't had time to stick; 
back when the smallest breezes 
melted summer into autumn, 
when all the poplars quivered 
sweetly in rank and file . . . 
the world called, and I answered. 
Each glance ignited to a gaze. 
I caught my breath and called that life, 
swooned between spoonfuls of lemon sorbet. 
I was pirouette and flourish, 
I was filigree and flame. 
How could I count my blessings 
when I didn't know their names? 
Back when everything was still to come, 
luck leaked out everywhere. 
I gave my promise to the world, 
and the world followed me here. 
i 
In view of the fading animals 
the proliferation of sewers and fears   
the sea clogging, the air 
nearing extinction 
we should be kind, we should 
take warning, we should forgive each other 
Instead we are opposite, we   
touch as though attacking, 
the gifts we bring 
even in good faith maybe   
warp in our hands to 
implements, to manoeuvres 
ii 
Put down the target of me 
you guard inside your binoculars,   
in turn I will surrender 
this aerial photograph   
(your vulnerable 
sections marked in red)   
I have found so useful 
See, we are alone in 
the dormant field, the snow 
that cannot be eaten or captured 
iii 
Here there are no armies   
here there is no money 
It is cold and getting colder, 
We need each others’ 
breathing, warmth, surviving   
is the only war 
we can afford, stay 
walking with me, there is almost   
time / if we can only   
make it as far as 
the (possibly) last summer 
for my sonThe way a tired Chippewa woman 
Who’s lost a child gathers up black feathers,   
Black quills & leaves 
That she wraps & swaddles in a little bale, a shag   
Cocoon she carries with her & speaks to always   
As if it were the child, 
Until she knows the soul has grown fat & clever,   
That the child can find its own way at last;   
Well, I go everywhere 
Picking the dust out of the dust, scraping the breezes   
Up off the floor, & gather them into a doll   
Of you, to touch at the nape of the neck, to slip   
Under my shirt like a rag—the way 
Another man’s wallet rides above his heart. As you   
Cry out, as if calling to a father you conjure   
In the paling light, the voice rises, instead, in me.   
Nothing stops it, the crying. Not the clove of moon, 
Not the woman raking my back with her words. Our letters   
Close. Sometimes, you ask 
About the world; sometimes, I answer back. Nights   
Return you to me for a while, as sleep returns sleep   
To a landscape ravaged 
& familiar. The dark watermark of your absence, a hush. 
There is a silence where hath been no sound, 
   There is a silence where no sound may be, 
   In the cold grave—under the deep deep sea, 
Or in the wide desert where no life is found, 
Which hath been mute, and still must sleep profound; 
   No voice is hush’d—no life treads silently, 
   But clouds and cloudy shadows wander free, 
That never spoke, over the idle ground: 
But in green ruins, in the desolate walls 
   Of antique palaces, where Man hath been, 
Though the dun fox, or wild hyena, calls, 
   And owls, that flit continually between, 
Shriek to the echo, and the low winds moan, 
There the true Silence is, self-conscious and alone. 
After all, there’s no need 
to say anything 
at first. An orange, peeled 
and quartered, flares 
like a tulip on a wedgewood plate 
Anything can happen. 
Outside the sun 
has rolled up her rugs 
and night strewn salt 
across the sky. My heart 
is humming a tune 
I haven’t heard in years! 
Quiet’s cool flesh— 
let’s sniff and eat it. 
There are ways 
to make of the moment 
a topiary 
so the pleasure’s in 
walking through. 
Man, looking into the sea— 
taking the view from those who have as much right to it as you have it to yourself— 
it is human nature to stand in the middle of a thing 
but you cannot stand in the middle of this: 
the sea has nothing to give but a well excavated grave. 
The firs stand in a procession—each with an emerald turkey-foot at the top— 
reserved as their contours, saying nothing; 
repression, however, is not the most obvious characteristic of the sea; 
the sea is a collector, quick to return a rapacious look. 
There are others besides you who have worn that look— 
whose expression is no longer a protest; the fish no longer investigate them 
for their bones have not lasted; 
men lower nets, unconscious of the fact that they are desecrating a grave, 
and row quickly away—the blades of the oars   
moving together like the feet of water-spiders as if there were no such thing as death. 
The wrinkles progress upon themselves in a phalanx—beautiful under networks of foam, 
and fade breathlessly while the sea rustles in and out of the seaweed; 
the birds swim through the air at top speed, emitting cat-calls as heretofore— 
the tortoise-shell scourges about the feet of the cliffs, in motion beneath them 
and the ocean, under the pulsation of light-houses and noise of bell-buoys, 
advances as usual, looking as if it were not that ocean in which dropped things are bound to sink— 
in which if they turn and twist, it is neither with volition nor consciousness. 
The two of them stood in the middle water,
 The current slipping away, quick and cold,
 The sun slow at his zenith, sweating gold,
 Once, in some sullen summer of father and daughter.
 Maybe he regretted he had brought her—
 She'd rather have been elsewhere, her look told—
 Perhaps a year ago, but now too old.
 Still, she remembered lessons he had taught her:
 To cast towards shadows, where the sunlight fails
 And fishes shelter in the undergrowth.
 And when the unseen strikes, how all else pales
 Beside the bright-dark struggle, the rainbow wroth,
 Life and death weighed in the shining scales,
 The invisible line pulled taut that links them both. 
Here they are. The soft eyes open.   
If they have lived in a wood 
It is a wood. 
If they have lived on plains 
It is grass rolling 
Under their feet forever. 
Having no souls, they have come,   
Anyway, beyond their knowing.   
Their instincts wholly bloom   
And they rise. 
The soft eyes open. 
To match them, the landscape flowers,   
Outdoing, desperately 
Outdoing what is required: 
The richest wood, 
The deepest field. 
For some of these, 
It could not be the place 
It is, without blood. 
These hunt, as they have done, 
But with claws and teeth grown perfect, 
More deadly than they can believe.   
They stalk more silently, 
And crouch on the limbs of trees,   
And their descent 
Upon the bright backs of their prey 
May take years 
In a sovereign floating of joy.   
And those that are hunted   
Know this as their life, 
Their reward: to walk 
Under such trees in full knowledge   
Of what is in glory above them,   
And to feel no fear, 
But acceptance, compliance.   
Fulfilling themselves without pain 
At the cycle’s center, 
They tremble, they walk   
Under the tree, 
They fall, they are torn,   
They rise, they walk again. 
as if it were a scene made-up by the mind,   
that is not mine, but is a made place, 
that is mine, it is so near to the heart,   
an eternal pasture folded in all thought   
so that there is a hall therein 
that is a made place, created by light   
wherefrom the shadows that are forms fall. 
Wherefrom fall all architectures I am 
I say are likenesses of the First Beloved   
whose flowers are flames lit to the Lady. 
She it is Queen Under The Hill 
whose hosts are a disturbance of words within words   
that is a field folded. 
It is only a dream of the grass blowing   
east against the source of the sun 
in an hour before the sun’s going down 
whose secret we see in a children’s game   
of ring a round of roses told. 
Often I am permitted to return to a meadow   
as if it were a given property of the mind   
that certain bounds hold against chaos, 
that is a place of first permission,   
everlasting omen of what is. 
From blossoms comes 
this brown paper bag of peaches 
we bought from the boy 
at the bend in the road where we turned toward   
signs painted Peaches. 
From laden boughs, from hands, 
from sweet fellowship in the bins, 
comes nectar at the roadside, succulent 
peaches we devour, dusty skin and all, 
comes the familiar dust of summer, dust we eat. 
O, to take what we love inside, 
to carry within us an orchard, to eat 
not only the skin, but the shade, 
not only the sugar, but the days, to hold 
the fruit in our hands, adore it, then bite into   
the round jubilance of peach. 
There are days we live 
as if death were nowhere 
in the background; from joy 
to joy to joy, from wing to wing, 
from blossom to blossom to 
impossible blossom, to sweet impossible blossom. 
Seated once by a brook, watching a child
Chiefly that paddled, I was thus beguiled.
Mellow the blackbird sang and sharp the thrush
Not far off in the oak and hazel brush,
Unseen. There was a scent like honeycomb
From mugwort dull. And down upon the dome
Of the stone the cart-horse kicks against so oft
A butterfly alighted. From aloft
He took the heat of the sun, and from below.
On the hot stone he perched contented so,
As if never a cart would pass again
That way; as if I were the last of men
And he the first of insects to have earth
And sun together and to know their worth.
I was divided between him and the gleam,
The motion, and the voices, of the stream,
The waters running frizzled over gravel,
That never vanish and for ever travel.
A grey flycatcher silent on a fence
And I sat as if we had been there since
The horseman and the horse lying beneath
The fir-tree-covered barrow on the heath,
The horseman and the horse with silver shoes,
Galloped the downs last. All that I could lose
I lost. And then the child’s voice raised the dead.
“No one’s been here before” was what she said
And what I felt, yet never should have found
A word for, while I gathered sight and sound. 
I don’t mind the human race.   
I’ve got pretty used to them   
In these past twenty-five years.   
I don’t mind if they sit next   
To me on streetcars, or eat   
In the same restaurants, if   
It’s not at the same table.   
However, I don’t approve   
Of a woman I respect 
Dancing with one of them. I’ve   
Tried asking them to my home   
Without success. I shouldn’t   
Care to see my own sister   
Marry one. Even if she 
Loved him, think of the children.   
Their art is interesting,   
But certainly barbarous.   
I’m sure, if given a chance,   
They’d kill us all in our beds.   
And you must admit, they smell. 
Surrounded by bone, surrounded by cells,
by rings, by rings of hell, by hair, surrounded by
air-is-a-thing, surrounded by silhouette, by honey-wet bees, yet
by skeletons of trees, surrounded by actual, yes, for practical
purposes, people, surrounded by surreal
popcorn, surrounded by the reborn: Surrender in the center
to surroundings. O surrender forever, never
end her, let her blend around, surrender to the surroundings that
surround the tender endo-surrender, that
tumble through the tumbling to that blue that
curls around the crumbling, to that, the blue that
rumbles under the sun bounding the pearl that
we walk on, talk on; we can chalk that
up to experience, sensing the brown here that’s
blue now, a drop of water surrounding a cow that’s
black & white, the warbling Blackburnian twitter that’s
machining midnight orange in the light that’s
glittering in the light green visible wind. That’s
the ticket to the tunnel through the thicket that’s
a cricket’s funnel of music to correct & pick it out
from under the wing that whirls up over & out. 
All these great barns out here in the outskirts,
black creosote boards knee-deep in the bluegrass.
They look so beautifully abandoned, even in use.
You say they look like arks after the sea’s
dried up, I say they look like pirate ships,
and I think of that walk in the valley where
J said, You don’t believe in God? And I said,
No. I believe in this connection we all have
to nature, to each other, to the universe.
And she said, Yeah, God. And how we stood there,
low beasts among the white oaks, Spanish moss,
and spider webs, obsidian shards stuck in our pockets,
woodpecker flurry, and I refused to call it so.
So instead, we looked up at the unruly sky,
its clouds in simple animal shapes we could name
though we knew they were really just clouds—
disorderly, and marvelous, and ours. 
If we could get the hang of it entirely 
   It would take too long; 
All we know is the splash of words in passing   
   And falling twigs of song, 
And when we try to eavesdrop on the great   
   Presences it is rarely 
That by a stroke of luck we can appropriate   
   Even a phrase entirely. 
If we could find our happiness entirely 
   In somebody else’s arms 
We should not fear the spears of the spring nor the city’s 
   Yammering fire alarms 
But, as it is, the spears each year go through 
   Our flesh and almost hourly   
Bell or siren banishes the blue   
   Eyes of Love entirely. 
And if the world were black or white entirely 
   And all the charts were plain 
Instead of a mad weir of tigerish waters, 
   A prism of delight and pain, 
We might be surer where we wished to go   
   Or again we might be merely 
Bored but in brute reality there is no 
Road that is right entirely. 
Your head is still 
restless, rolling 
east and west. 
That body in you 
insisting on living 
is the old hawk 
for whom the world 
darkens. 
If I am not 
with you when you die, 
that is just. 
It is all right. 
That part of you cleaned 
my bones more 
than once. But I 
will meet you 
in the young hawk 
whom I see 
inside both 
you and me; he 
will guide 
you to the Lord of Night, 
who will give you 
the tenderness 
you wanted here. 
     In memory of my parents People whose lives have been shaped
by history—and it is always tragic—
do not want to talk about it,
would rather dance, give parties
on thrift-shop china. You feel
wonderful in their homes,
two leaky rooms, nests
they stowed inside their hearts
on the road into exile.
They know how to fix potato peelings
and apple cores so you smack your lips.
The words start over again
hold no terror for them.
Obediently they rise
and go with only a rucksack
or tote bag. If they weep,
it’s when you’re not looking.
To tame their nightmares, they choose
the most dazzling occupations,
swallow the flames in the sunset sky,
jump through burning hoops
in their elegant tiger suits.
Cover your eyes: there’s one
walking on a thread
thirty feet above us—
shivering points of light
leap across her body,
and she works without a net. 
Miniver Cheevy, child of scorn, 
   Grew lean while he assailed the seasons; 
He wept that he was ever born, 
   And he had reasons. 
Miniver loved the days of old 
   When swords were bright and steeds were prancing; 
The vision of a warrior bold 
   Would set him dancing. 
Miniver sighed for what was not, 
   And dreamed, and rested from his labors; 
He dreamed of Thebes and Camelot, 
   And Priam’s neighbors. 
Miniver mourned the ripe renown 
   That made so many a name so fragrant; 
He mourned Romance, now on the town, 
   And Art, a vagrant. 
Miniver loved the Medici, 
   Albeit he had never seen one; 
He would have sinned incessantly 
   Could he have been one. 
Miniver cursed the commonplace 
   And eyed a khaki suit with loathing; 
He missed the mediæval grace 
   Of iron clothing. 
Miniver scorned the gold he sought, 
   But sore annoyed was he without it; 
Miniver thought, and thought, and thought, 
   And thought about it. 
Miniver Cheevy, born too late, 
   Scratched his head and kept on thinking; 
Miniver coughed, and called it fate, 
   And kept on drinking. 
If I speak for the dead, I must leave
this animal of my body,
I must write the same poem over and over,
for an empty page is the white flag of their surrender.
If I speak for them, I must walk on the edge
of myself, I must live as a blind man
who runs through rooms without
touching the furniture.
Yes, I live. I can cross the streets asking “What year is it?”
I can dance in my sleep and laugh
in front of the mirror.
Even sleep is a prayer, Lord,
I will praise your madness, and
in a language not mine, speak
of music that wakes us, music
in which we move. For whatever I say
is a kind of petition, and the darkest
days must I praise.
Out of me unworthy and unknown 
The vibrations of deathless music; 
“With malice toward none, with charity for all.” 
Out of me the forgiveness of millions toward millions, 
And the beneficent face of a nation 
Shining with justice and truth. 
I am Anne Rutledge who sleep beneath these weeds, 
Beloved in life of Abraham Lincoln, 
Wedded to him, not through union, 
But through separation. 
Bloom forever, O Republic, 
From the dust of my bosom! 
When you are old and grey and full of sleep, 
And nodding by the fire, take down this book, 
And slowly read, and dream of the soft look 
Your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep; 
How many loved your moments of glad grace, 
And loved your beauty with love false or true, 
But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you, 
And loved the sorrows of your changing face; 
And bending down beside the glowing bars, 
Murmur, a little sadly, how Love fled 
And paced upon the mountains overhead 
And hid his face amid a crowd of stars. 
I wanted to be sure to reach you; 
though my ship was on the way it got caught   
in some moorings. I am always tying up   
and then deciding to depart. In storms and   
at sunset, with the metallic coils of the tide   
around my fathomless arms, I am unable   
to understand the forms of my vanity   
or I am hard alee with my Polish rudder   
in my hand and the sun sinking. To   
you I offer my hull and the tattered cordage   
of my will. The terrible channels where   
the wind drives me against the brown lips   
of the reeds are not all behind me. Yet   
I trust the sanity of my vessel; and   
if it sinks, it may well be in answer   
to the reasoning of the eternal voices, 
the waves which have kept me from reaching you. 
After reading Ash Wednesday 
she looked once at the baked beans   
and fled. Luncheonless, poor girl,   
she observed a kind of poetic Lent— 
and I had thought I liked poetry   
better than she did. 
I do. But to me its most endearing 
quality is its unsuitableness; 
and, conversely, the chief wonder in heaven   
(whither I also am sometimes transported)   
is the kind of baggage I bring with me. 
Surely there is no more exquisite jointure   
in the anatomy of life than that at which   
poetry dovetails with the inevitable meal   
and Mrs. B. sits murmuring of avocados. 
I was miserable, of course, for I was seventeen, 
and so I swung into action and wrote a poem, 
and it was miserable, for that was how I thought 
poetry worked: you digested experience and shat 
literature. It was 1960 at The Showplace, long since 
defunct, on West 4th St., and I sat at the bar, 
casting beer money from a thin reel of ones, 
the kid in the city, big ears like a puppy. 
And I knew Mingus was a genius. I knew two 
other things, but they were wrong, as it happened. 
So I made him look at the poem. 
“There’s a lot of that going around,” he said, 
and Sweet Baby Jesus he was right. He laughed 
amiably. He didn’t look as if he thought 
bad poems were dangerous, the way some poets do. 
If they were baseball executives they’d plot 
to destroy sandlots everywhere so that the game 
could be saved from children.   Of course later 
that night he fired his pianist in mid-number 
and flurried him from the stand. 
“We’ve suffered a diminuendo in personnel,” 
he explained, and the band played on. 
Nothing worth noting 
except an Andromeda 
with quadrangular shoots— 
            the boots 
of the people 
wet inside: they must swim 
to church thru the floods 
or be taxed—the blossoms 
            from the bosoms 
of the leaves 
* 
Fog-thick morning— 
I see only 
where I now walk. I carry 
            my clarity 
with me. 
Hear 
where her snow-grave is 
the You 
            ah you
Sundays too my father got up early 
and put his clothes on in the blueblack cold, 
then with cracked hands that ached 
from labor in the weekday weather made 
banked fires blaze. No one ever thanked him. 
I’d wake and hear the cold splintering, breaking.breaking. / When In A Ballad of Remembrance (1962), the line between these two lines reads: "and smell the iron and velvet bloom of heat." While this line was deleted, the version in A Ballad of Remembrance is still a sonnet. There are other variants between both versions; mostly relating to where the line breaks.  
When breaking. / When In A Ballad of Remembrance (1962), the line between these two lines reads:"and smell the iron and velvet bloom of heat." While this line was deleted, the version in A Ballad of Remembrance is still a sonnet. There are other variants between both versions; mostly relating to where the line breaks.  the rooms were warm, he’d call, 
and slowly I would rise and dress, 
fearing the chronic angers of that house, 
Speaking indifferently to him, 
who had who had In A Ballad of Remembrance: who’d  driven out the cold 
and polished my good shoes as well. 
What did I know, what did I know 
of love’s austereaustere Grave, sober; and lacking adornment and lonely offices? 
for MiguelIt would be neat if with the New Year 
I could leave my loneliness behind with the old year. 
My leathery loneliness an old pair of work boots 
my dog vigorously head-shakes back and forth in its jaws, 
chews on for hours every day in my front yard— 
rain, sun, snow, or wind 
in bare feet, pondering my poem, 
I’d look out my window and see that dirty pair of boots in the yard. 
But my happiness depends so much on wearing those boots. 
At the end of my day 
while I’m in a chair listening to a Mexican corrido 
I stare at my boots appreciating: 
all the wrong roads we’ve taken, all the drug and whiskey houses 
we’ve visited, and as the Mexican singer wails his pain, 
I smile at my boots, understanding every note in his voice, 
and strangers, when they see my boots rocking back and forth on my 
                                                                                                    feet 
keeping beat to the song, see how 
my boots are scuffed, tooth-marked, worn-soled. 
I keep wearing them because they fit so good 
and I need them, especially when I love so hard, 
where I go up those boulder strewn trails, 
where flowers crack rocks in their defiant love for the light. 
Does the road wind up-hill all the way? 
   Yes, to the very end. 
Will the day’s journey take the whole long day? 
   From morn to night, my friend. 
But is there for the night a resting-place? 
   A roof for when the slow dark hours begin. 
May not the darkness hide it from my face? 
   You cannot miss that inn. 
Shall I meet other wayfarers at night? 
   Those who have gone before. 
Then must I knock, or call when just in sight? 
   They will not keep you standing at that door. 
Shall I find comfort, travel-sore and weak? 
   Of labour you shall find the sum. 
Will there be beds for me and all who seek? 
   Yea, beds for all who come. 
The art of losing isn’t hard to master; 
so many things seem filled with the intent 
to be lost that their loss is no disaster. 
Lose something every day. Accept the fluster 
of lost door keys, the hour badly spent. 
The art of losing isn’t hard to master. 
Then practice losing farther, losing faster: 
places, and names, and where it was you meant 
to travel. None of these will bring disaster. 
I lost my mother’s watch. And look! my last, or 
next-to-last, of three loved houses went. 
I lost two cities, lovely ones. And, vaster, 
some realms I owned, two rivers, a continent. 
I miss them, but it wasn’t a disaster. 
—Even losing you (the joking voice, a gesture 
I love) I shan’t have lied. It’s evident 
the art of losing’s not too hard to master 
though it may look like (Write it!) like disaster. 
Come live with me 
And we will sit
Upon the rocks 
By shallow rivers
And we will plant acorns
In each other's mouth 
It would be our way
Of greeting the earth 
Before it shoves us
Back into the snow 
Our interior cavities
Brimming with 
Disagreeable substances
Before winter stops
To use the only pillow 
The sky ever sleeps on
Our interior cavities 
Brimming with snow
Before spring
Swallows the air 
And birds sing 
Your mind and you are our Sargasso Sea, 
      London has swept about you this score years 
And bright ships left you this or that in fee: 
      Ideas, old gossip, oddments of all things, 
Strange spars of knowledge and dimmed wares of price. 
      Great minds have sought you — lacking someone else. 
You have been second always. Tragical? 
      No. You preferred it to the usual thing: 
One dull man, dulling and uxorious, 
      One average mind —   with one thought less, each year. 
Oh, you are patient, I have seen you sit 
      Hours, where something might have floated up. 
And now you pay one.   Yes, you richly pay. 
      You are a person of some interest, one comes to you 
And takes strange gain away: 
      Trophies fished up; some curious suggestion; 
Fact that leads nowhere; and a tale for two, 
      Pregnant with mandrakes, or with something else 
That might prove useful and yet never proves, 
      That never fits a corner or shows use, 
Or finds its hour upon the loom of days: 
      The tarnished, gaudy, wonderful old work; 
Idols and ambergris and rare inlays, 
      These are your riches, your great store; and yet 
For all this sea-hoard of deciduous things, 
      Strange woods half sodden, and new brighter stuff: 
In the slow float of differing light and deep, 
      No! there is nothing! In the whole and all, 
Nothing that's quite your own. 
                  Yet this is you. 
For Carolina EbeidWe enrolled at barbizon
Knowing full well
We’d never look like
What was promised
Cue carol of the bells
Cue a demo on the casio
And the security of two-way
Escalators setting the speed
Those early mornings
In our mall school
The store’s silver grills
Some mannequins left
Half-clothed
We’d taunt them
With our imagined summers
In london paris rome
We weren’t please and thank you
Walking with books on our heads
No we were going to devastate
Greek shipping heirs
At every port of call
Yet when our bus broke down
And we trudged the shoulder
Of highways
Single file
Dodging cigarette butt and horn
We shook off those mornings
Studied
Their defenseless
Indifference
The blinding surface
The quality of electric
Without being alive
We knew that there
In only hot pants
The ideal form
Plastic
Most would take a bullet for
                                                   While at 16
We were already trash-talking
Our prayers never went beyond
The second floor
Light-years away
From the last word
That distant somewhere
Where a boat loses course
The north star forsaking
Its name to another 
I don’t know somehow it seems sufficient 
to see and hear whatever coming and going is, 
losing the self to the victory 
   of stones and trees, 
of bending sandpit lakes, crescent 
round groves of dwarf pine: 
for it is not so much to know the self   
as to know it as it is known 
   by galaxy and cedar cone, 
as if birth had never found it 
and death could never end it: 
the swamp’s slow water comes   
down Gravelly Run fanning the long   
   stone-held algal 
hair and narrowing roils between   
the shoulders of the highway bridge: 
holly grows on the banks in the woods there,   
and the cedars’ gothic-clustered 
   spires could make 
green religion in winter bones: 
so I look and reflect, but the air’s glass   
jail seals each thing in its entity: 
no use to make any philosophies here: 
   I see no 
god in the holly, hear no song from 
the snowbroken weeds: Hegel is not the winter   
yellow in the pines: the sunlight has never   
heard of trees: surrendered self among 
   unwelcoming forms: stranger, 
hoist your burdens, get on down the road. 
Most truly honoured, and as truly dear,
If worth in me or ought I do appear,
Who can of right better demand the same
Than may your worthy self from whom it came?
The principal might yield a greater sum,
Yet handled ill, amounts but to this crumb;
My stock's so small I know not how to pay,
My bond remains in force unto this day;
Yet for part payment take this simple mite,
Where nothing's to be had, kings loose their right.
Such is my debt I may not say forgive,
But as I can, I'll pay it while I live;
Such is my bond, none can discharge but I,
Yet paying is not paid until I die. 
for BobbieYesterday I wanted to 
speak of it, that sense above   
the others to me 
important because all 
that I know derives 
from what it teaches me.   
Today, what is it that   
is finally so helpless, 
different, despairs of its own   
statement, wants to 
turn away, endlessly 
to turn away. 
If the moon did not ... 
no, if you did not 
I wouldn’t either, but   
what would I not 
do, what prevention, what   
thing so quickly stopped.   
That is love yesterday   
or tomorrow, not 
now. Can I eat 
what you give me. I 
have not earned it. Must   
I think of everything 
as earned. Now love also   
becomes a reward so 
remote from me I have 
only made it with my mind. 
Here is tedium, 
despair, a painful 
sense of isolation and   
whimsical if pompous 
self-regard. But that image   
is only of the mind’s 
vague structure, vague to me   
because it is my own. 
Love, what do I think 
to say. I cannot say it. 
What have you become to ask,   
what have I made you into, 
companion, good company,   
crossed legs with skirt, or   
soft body under 
the bones of the bed. 
Nothing says anything   
but that which it wishes   
would come true, fears   
what else might happen in 
some other place, some   
other time not this one.   
A voice in my place, an   
echo of that only in yours. 
Let me stumble into 
not the confession but   
the obsession I begin with   
now. For you 
also (also) 
some time beyond place, or   
place beyond time, no   
mind left to 
say anything at all, 
that face gone, now. 
Into the company of love   
it all returns. 
Break, break, break, 
         On thy cold gray stones, O Sea! 
And I would that my tongue could utter 
         The thoughts that arise in me. 
O, well for the fisherman's boy, 
         That he shouts with his sister at play! 
O, well for the sailor lad, 
         That he sings in his boat on the bay! 
And the stately ships go on 
         To their haven under the hill; 
But O for the touch of a vanish'd hand, 
         And the sound of a voice that is still! 
Break, break, break 
         At the foot of thy crags, O Sea! 
But the tender grace of a day that is dead 
         Will never come back to me. 
Mine, said the stone, 
mine is the hour. 
I crush the scissors, 
such is my power. 
Stronger than wishes, 
my power, alone. 
Mine, said the paper, 
mine are the words 
that smother the stone 
with imagined birds, 
reams of them, flown 
from the mind of the shaper. 
Mine, said the scissors, 
mine all the knives 
gashing through paper’s 
ethereal lives; 
nothing’s so proper 
as tattering wishes. 
As stone crushes scissors, 
as paper snuffs stone 
and scissors cut paper, 
all end alone. 
So heap up your paper 
and scissor your wishes 
and uproot the stone 
from the top of the hill. 
They all end alone 
as you will, you will. 
Since all that beat about in Nature's range, 
Or veer or vanish; why should'st thou remain 
The only constant in a world of change, 
O yearning Thought! that liv'st but in the brain? 
Call to the Hours, that in the distance play, 
The faery people of the future day— 
Fond Thought! not one of all that shining swarm 
Will breathe on thee with life-enkindling breath, 
Till when, like strangers shelt'ring from a storm, 
Hope and Despair meet in the porch of Death! 
Yet still thou haunt'st me; and though well I see, 
She is not thou, and only thou are she, 
Still, still as though some dear embodied Good, 
Some living Love before my eyes there stood 
With answering look a ready ear to lend, 
I mourn to thee and say—'Ah! loveliest friend! 
That this the meed of all my toils might be, 
To have a home, an English home, and thee!' 
Vain repetition! Home and Thou are one. 
The peacefull'st cot, the moon shall shine upon, 
Lulled by the thrush and wakened by the lark, 
Without thee were but a becalméd bark, 
Whose Helmsman on an ocean waste and wide 
Sits mute and pale his mouldering helm beside. 
And art thou nothing? Such thou art, as when 
The woodman winding westward up the glen 
At wintry dawn, where o'er the sheep-track's maze 
The viewless snow-mist weaves a glist'ning haze, 
Sees full before him, gliding without tread, 
An image with a glory round its head; 
The enamoured rustic worships its fair hues, 
Nor knows he makes the shadow, he pursues! 
After the fierce midsummer all ablaze 
    Has burned itself to ashes, and expires 
    In the intensity of its own fires, 
There come the mellow, mild, St. Martin days 
Crowned with the calm of peace, but sad with haze. 
    So after Love has led us, till he tires 
    Of his own throes, and torments, and desires, 
Comes large-eyed friendship: with a restful gaze, 
He beckons us to follow, and across 
    Cool verdant vales we wander free from care. 
    Is it a touch of frost lies in the air? 
Why are we haunted with a sense of loss? 
We do not wish the pain back, or the heat; 
And yet, and yet, these days are incomplete. 
Jenny kissed me when we met,
    Jumping from the chair she sat in;
Time, you thief, who love to get
    Sweets into your list, put that in:
Say I'm weary, say I'm sad,
    Say that health and wealth have missed me,
Say I'm growing old, but add,
    Jenny kissed me.
Today we woke up to a revolution of snow,   
its white flag waving over everything, 
the landscape vanished, 
not a single mouse to punctuate the blankness,   
and beyond these windows 
the government buildings smothered, 
schools and libraries buried, the post office lost   
under the noiseless drift, 
the paths of trains softly blocked, 
the world fallen under this falling. 
In a while, I will put on some boots 
and step out like someone walking in water,   
and the dog will porpoise through the drifts,   
and I will shake a laden branch 
sending a cold shower down on us both. 
But for now I am a willing prisoner in this house,   
a sympathizer with the anarchic cause of snow.   
I will make a pot of tea 
and listen to the plastic radio on the counter,   
as glad as anyone to hear the news 
that the Kiddie Corner School is closed,   
the Ding-Dong School, closed. 
the All Aboard Children’s School, closed,   
the Hi-Ho Nursery School, closed, 
along with—some will be delighted to hear— 
the Toadstool School, the Little School, 
Little Sparrows Nursery School, 
Little Stars Pre-School, Peas-and-Carrots Day School   
the Tom Thumb Child Center, all closed, 
and—clap your hands—the Peanuts Play School. 
So this is where the children hide all day, 
These are the nests where they letter and draw,   
where they put on their bright miniature jackets,   
all darting and climbing and sliding, 
all but the few girls whispering by the fence. 
And now I am listening hard 
in the grandiose silence of the snow, 
trying to hear what those three girls are plotting,   
what riot is afoot, 
which small queen is about to be brought down. 
Soul and race 
are private dominions,   
memories and modal 
songs, a tenor blossoming, 
which would paint suffering   
a clear color but is not in   
this Victorian house 
without oil in zero degree 
weather and a forty-mile-an-hour wind; 
it is all a well-knit family:   
a love supreme. 
Oak leaves pile up on walkway 
and steps, catholic as apples 
in a special mist of clear white   
children who love my children.   
I play “Alabama” 
on a warped record player 
skipping the scratches 
on your faces over the fibrous   
conical hairs of plastic 
under the wooden floors. 
Dreaming on a train from New York   
to Philly, you hand out six 
notes which become an anthem 
to our memories of you: 
oak, birch, maple, 
apple, cocoa, rubber. 
For this reason Martin is dead; 
for this reason Malcolm is dead; 
for this reason Coltrane is dead; 
in the eyes of my first son are the browns   
of these men and their music. 
Gay Fashion thou Goddess so pleasing, 
   However imperious thy sway; 
Like a mistress capricious and teasing, 
   Thy slaves tho’ they murmur obey. 
The simple, the wise, and the witty, 
   The learned, the dunce, and the fool, 
The crooked, straight, ugly, and pretty, 
   Wear the badge of thy whimsical school. 
Tho’ thy shape be so fickle and changing, 
   That a Proteus thou art to the view; 
And our taste so for ever deranging, 
   We know not which form to pursue. 
Yet wave but thy frolicksome banners, 
   And hosts of adherents we see; 
Arts, morals, religion, and manners, 
   Yield implicit obedience to thee. 
More despotic than beauty thy power, 
   More than virtue thy rule o’er the mind: 
Tho’ transient thy reign as a flower, 
   That scatters its leaves to the wind. 
Ah! while folly thou dealest such measure, 
   No matter how fleeting thy day! 
Be Wisdom, dear goddess, thy pleasure! 
   Then lasting as time be thy stay. 
Song from AbdelazarLove in Fantastic Triumph sat,
Whilst Bleeding Hearts around him flowed,
For whom Fresh pains he did Create,
And strange Tyrannic power he showed;
From thy Bright Eyes he took his fire,
Which round about, in sport he hurled;
But ’twas from mine he took desire
Enough to undo the Amorous World.
From me he took his sighs and tears,
From thee his Pride and Cruelty;
From me his Languishments and Fears,
And every Killing Dart from thee;
Thus thou and I, the God have armed,
And set him up a Deity;
But my poor Heart alone is harmed,
Whilst thine the Victor is, and free. 
after Gwendolyn BrooksI. 1981
When I am so small Da’s sock covers my arm, we
cruise at twilight until we find the place the real
men lean, bloodshot and translucent with cool.
His smile is a gold-plated incantation as we
drift by women on bar stools, with nothing left
in them but approachlessness. This is a school
I do not know yet. But the cue sticks mean we
are rubbed by light, smooth as wood, the lurk
of smoke thinned to song. We won’t be out late.
Standing in the middle of the street last night we
watched the moonlit lawns and a neighbor strike
his son in the face. A shadow knocked straight
Da promised to leave me everything: the shovel we
used to bury the dog, the words he loved to sing
his rusted pistol, his squeaky Bible, his sin.
The boy’s sneakers were light on the road. We
watched him run to us looking wounded and thin.
He’d been caught lying or drinking his father’s gin.
He’d been defending his ma, trying to be a man. We
stood in the road, and my father talked about jazz,
how sometimes a tune is born of outrage. By June
the boy would be locked upstate. That night we
got down on our knees in my room. If I should die
before I wake. Da said to me, it will be too soon.
II. 1991
Into the tented city we go, we-
akened by the fire’s ethereal
afterglow. Born lost and cool-
er than heartache. What we
know is what we know. The left
hand severed and school-
ed by cleverness. A plate of we-
ekdays cooking. The hour lurk-
ing in the afterglow. A late-
night chant. Into the city we
go. Close your eyes and strike
a blow. Light can be straight-
ened by its shadow. What we
break is what we hold. A sing-
ular blue note. An outcry sin-
ged exiting the throat. We
push until we thin, thin-
king we won’t creep back again.
While God licks his kin, we
sing until our blood is jazz,
we swing from June to June.
We sweat to keep from we-
eping. Groomed on a die-
t of hunger, we end too soon. 
I came to you one rainless August night. 
You taught me how to live without the rain. 
You are thirst and thirst is all I know. 
You are sand, wind, sun, and burning sky, 
The hottest blue. You blow a breeze and brand 
Your breath into my mouth. You reach—then bend 
Your force, to break, blow, burn, and make me new. 
You wrap your name tight around my ribs 
And keep me warm. I was born for you. 
Above, below, by you, by you surrounded. 
I wake to you at dawn. Never break your 
Knot. Reach, rise, blow, Sálvame, mi dios, 
Trágame, mi tierra. Salva, traga, Break me, 
I am bread. I will be the water for your thirst. 
Ravished lute, sing to her virgin ears,   
Soft notes thy strings repeating; 
Plucked harp, whose amorous song she hears,   
Tell her the time is fleeting; 
Night-tide and my distress of love 
O speak, sweet numbers, 
That pity her heart may move 
Before she slumbers. 
Pale moth, that from the moon doth fly,   
Fickle enchantments weaving, 
Night faery, come my lady nigh 
When the rich masques are leaving;   
Tell her who lieth still alone 
Love is a treasure 
Fair as the frail lute’s tone 
And perished measure. 
for Roger CailloisWater hollows stone,
wind scatters water,
stone stops the wind.
Water, wind, stone.
Wind carves stone,
stone's a cup of water,
water escapes and is wind.
Stone, wind, water.
Wind sings in its whirling,
water murmurs going by,
unmoving stone keeps still.
Wind, water, stone.
Each is another and no other:
crossing and vanishing
through their empty names:
water, stone, wind. 
      Love not too much. But how,
When thou hast made me such,
And dost thy gifts bestow,
How can I love too much?
      Though I must fear to lose,
And drown my joy in care,
With all its thorns I choose
The path of love and prayer.
      Though thou, I know not why,
Didst kill my childish trust,
That breach with toil did I
Repair, because I must:
      And spite of frighting schemes,
With which the fiends of Hell
Blaspheme thee in my dreams,
So far I have hoped well.
      But what the heavenly key,
What marvel in me wrought
Shall quite exculpate thee,
I have no shadow of thought.
      What am I that complain?
The love, from which began
My question sad and vain,
Justifies thee to man.
         Come here’s
a peach he said
         and held it out just far
enough to reach beyond his lap
         and off-
         ered me
a room the one
         room left he said in all
of Thessaloniki that night
         packed with
         traders
The peach was lush
         I hadn’t slept for days
it was like velvet lips a lamp
         he smiled
         patted
the bed for me
         I knew it was in fact
the only room the only bed
         The peach
         trembled
and he said Come
         nodding to make me
agree I wanted the peach and
         the bed
         he said
to take it see
         how nice it was and I
thought how I could take it ginger-
         ly my
         finger-
tips only touch-
         ing only it Not in
or out I stayed in the doorway
         watching
         a fly
He stroked the peach
         and asked where I was from
I said the States he smiled and asked
         how long
         I’d stay
The fly had found
         the peach I said I’d leave
for Turkey in the morning I
         wanted
         so much
to sleep and on
         a bed I thought of all
the ways to say that word
         and that
         they must
have gradient
         meanings He asked me did
I want the peach and I said sure
         and took
         it from
his hand He asked
         then if I’d take the room
It costs too much I said and turned
         to go
         He said
to stay a while
         and we could talk The sun
was going down I said no thanks
         I’d head
         out on
the late train but
         could I still have the peach
and what else could he say to that
         but yes
In that country the animals   
have the faces of people: 
the ceremonial 
cats possessing the streets 
the fox run 
politely to earth, the huntsmen   
standing around him, fixed   
in their tapestry of manners 
the bull, embroidered 
with blood and given 
an elegant death, trumpets, his name   
stamped on him, heraldic brand   
because 
(when he rolled 
on the sand, sword in his heart, the teeth   
in his blue mouth were human) 
he is really a man 
even the wolves, holding resonant   
conversations in their   
forests thickened with legend. 
            In this country the animals   
            have the faces of   
            animals. 
            Their eyes 
            flash once in car headlights   
            and are gone. 
            Their deaths are not elegant. 
            They have the faces of   
            no-one. 
I teach my friend, a fisherman gone blind, to cast
 true left, right or center and how far
 between lily pads and the fallen cedar.
 Darkness is precious, how long will darkness last?
 Our bait, worms, have no professors, they live
 in darkness, can be taught fear of light.
 Cut into threes even sixes they live
 separate lives, recoil from light.
 He tells me, “I am seldom blind
 when I dream, morning is anthracite,
 I play blind man’s bluff,
 I cannot find myself,
 my shoe, the sink,
 tell time, but that’s spilled milk and ink,
 the lost and found  I cannot find.
 I can tell the difference between a mollusk and a whelk,
 a grieving liar and a lemon rind.”
 Laughing, he says, “I still hope the worm will turn,
 pink, lank, and warm, dined
 out on apples of good fortune.
 Books have a faintly legible smell.
 Divorced from the sun, I am a kind
 of bachelor henpecked by the night.
 Sometimes I use my darkness well—
 in the overcast and sunlight of my mind.
 I can still wink, sing, my eyes are songs.”
 He could not fish, he could not walk, he fell
 in his own feces. He wept. He died where he fell.
 The power of beauty to right all wrongs
 is hard for me to sell. 
Women’s tears are but water;
The tears of men are blood.
He sits alone in the firelight
And on either side drifts by
Sleep, like a torrent whirling,
Profound, wrinkled and dumb.
Circuitously, stealthily,
Dawn occupies the city;
As if the seasons knew of his grief
Spring has suddenly changed into snow
Disaster and sorrow
Have made him their pet;
He cannot escape their accursed embraces.
For all his dodgings
Memory will lacerate him.
What good does it do to wander
Nights hours through city streets?
Only that in poor places
He can be with common men
And receive their unspoken
Instinctive sympathy.
What has life done for him?
He stands alone in the darkness
Like a sentry never relieved,
Looking over a barren space,
Awaiting the tardy finish. 
To wake when all is possible
before the agitations of the day
have gripped you
                    To come to the kitchen
and peel a little basketball
for breakfast
              To tear the husk
like cotton padding        a cloud of oil
misting out of its pinprick pores
clean and sharp as pepper
                             To ease
each pale pink section out of its case
so carefully       without breaking
a single pearly cell 
                    To slide each piece
into a cold blue china bowl
the juice pooling       until the whole
fruit is divided from its skin
and only then to eat
                  so sweet
                            a discipline
precisely pointless       a devout
involvement of the hands and senses
a pause     a little emptiness
each year harder to live within
each year harder to live without
When the child's forehead, full of red torments,
Implores the white swarm of indistinct dreams,
There come near his bed two tall charming sisters
With slim fingers that have silvery nails.
They seat the child in front of a wide open
Window where the blue air bathes a mass of flowers
And in his heavy hair where the dew falls
Move their delicate, fearful and enticing fingers.
He listens to the singing of their apprehensive breath.
Which smells of long rosy plant honey
And which at times a hiss interrupts, saliva
Caught on the lip or desire for kisses.
He hears their black eyelashes beating in the perfumed
Silence; and their gentle electric fingers
Make in his half-drunken indolence the death of the little lice
Crackle under their royal nails.
Then the wine of Sloth rises in him,
The sigh of an harmonica which could bring on delirium;
The child feels, according to the slowness of the caresses
Surging in him and dying continuously a desire to cry. 
I lov’d thee from the earliest dawn,
      When first I saw thy beauty’s ray,
 And will, until life’s eve comes on,
      And beauty’s blossom fades away;
 And when all things go well with thee,
 With smiles and tears remember me.
 I’ll love thee when thy morn is past,
      And wheedling gallantry is o’er,
 When youth is lost in age’s blast,
      And beauty can ascend no more,
 And when life’s journey ends with thee,
 O, then look back and think of me.
 I’ll love thee with a smile or frown,
      ’Mid sorrow’s gloom or pleasure’s light,
 And when the chain of life runs down,
      Pursue thy last eternal flight,
 When thou hast spread thy wing to flee,
 Still, still, a moment wait for me.
 I’ll love thee for those sparkling eyes,
      To which my fondness was betray’d,
 Bearing the tincture of the skies,
      To glow when other beauties fade,
 And when they sink too low to see,
 Reflect an azure beam on me. 
Often rebuked, yet always back returning
    To those first feelings that were born with me,
And leaving busy chase of wealth and learning
    For idle dreams of things which cannot be:
To-day, I will seek not the shadowy region;
    Its unsustaining vastness waxes drear;
And visions rising, legion after legion,
    Bring the unreal world too strangely near.
I’ll walk, but not in old heroic traces,
    And not in paths of high morality,
And not among the half-distinguished faces,
    The clouded forms of long-past history.
I’ll walk where my own nature would be leading:
    It vexes me to choose another guide:
Where the gray flocks in ferny glens are feeding;
    Where the wild wind blows on the mountain side.
What have those lonely mountains worth revealing?
    More glory and more grief than I can tell:
The earth that wakes one human heart to feeling
    Can centre both the worlds of Heaven and Hell. 
The tide rises, the tide falls, 
The twilight darkens, the curlew calls; 
Along the sea-sands damp and brown 
The traveller hastens toward the town, 
      And the tide rises, the tide falls. 
Darkness settles on roofs and walls, 
But the sea, the sea in the darkness calls; 
The little waves, with their soft, white hands, 
Efface the footprints in the sands, 
The morning breaks; the steeds in their stalls 
Stamp and neigh, as the hostler calls; 
The day returns, but nevermore 
Returns the traveller to the shore, 
Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord: 
He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored; 
He hath loosed the fatal lightning of his terrible swift sword: 
      His truth is marching on. 
I have seen Him in the watch-fires of a hundred circling camps; 
They have builded Him an altar in the evening dews and damps; 
I can read His righteous sentence by the dim and flaring lamps. 
      His Day is marching on. 
I have read a fiery gospel, writ in burnished rows of steel: 
“As ye deal with my contemners, so with you my grace shall deal; 
Let the Hero, born of woman, crush the serpent with his heel, 
      Since God is marching on.” 
He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat; 
He is sifting out the hearts of men before his judgment-seat: 
Oh! be swift, my soul, to answer Him! be jubilant, my feet! 
      Our God is marching on. 
In the beauty of the lilies Christ was born across the sea, 
With a glory in his bosom that transfigures you and me: 
As he died to make men holy, let us die to make men free, 
      While God is marching on. 
﻿A queer thing about those waters: there are no
Birds there, or hardly any.
I did not miss them, I do not remember
Missing them, or thinking it uncanny.
The beach so-called was a blinding splinter of limestone,
A quarry outraged by hulls.
We took pleasure in that: the emptiness, the hardness
Of the light, the silence, and the water’s stillness.
But this was the setting for one of our murderous scenes.
This hurt, and goes on hurting:
The venomous soft jelly, the undersides.
We could stand the world if it were hard all over.
He lived—childhood summers 
    thru bare feet 
then years of money’s lack 
    and heat 
beside the river—out of flood 
    came his wood, dog, 
woman, lost her, daughter— 
    prologue 
to planting trees. He buried carp 
    beneath the rose 
where grass-still 
    the marsh rail goes. 
To bankers on high land 
    he opened his wine tank. 
He wished his only daughter 
    to work in the bank 
but he’d given her a source 
    to sustain her— 
a weedy speech, 
    a marshy retainer. 
From a documentary on marsupials I learn 
that a pillowcase makes a fine 
substitute pouch for an orphaned kangaroo. 
I am drawn to such dramas of animal rescue. 
They are warm in the throat. I suffer, the critic proclaims, 
from an overabundance of maternal genes. 
Bring me your fallen fledgling, your bummer lamb, 
lead the abused, the starvelings, into my barn. 
Advise the hunted deer to leap into my corn. 
And had there been a wild child— 
filthy and fierce as a ferret, he is called 
in one nineteenth-century account— 
a wild child to love, it is safe to assume, 
given my fireside inked with paw prints, 
there would have been room. 
Think of the language we two, same and not-same, 
might have constructed from sign, 
scratch, grimace, grunt, vowel: 
Laughter our first noun, and our long verb, howl. 
This old house lodges no ghosts!
Those swaggering specters who found their way 
Across the Atlantic
Were left behind
With their old European grudges 
In the farmhouses of New England 
And Pennsylvania
Like so much jettisoned baggage 
Too heavy
To lug over the Piedmont.
The flatlands are inhospitable
To phantoms. Here
Shadows are sharp and arbitrary
Not mazy, obscure, 
Cowering in corners
Behind scary old boots in a cupboard
Or muffled in empty coats, deserted
By long-dead cousins
(Who appear now and then
But only in photographs 
Already rusting at the edges)
Setting out in the creaking wagon 
Tight-lipped, alert to move on, 
The old settlers had no room 
For illusions.
Their dangers were real.
Now in the spare square house 
Their great-grandchildren
Tidy away the past
Until the polished surfaces
Reflect not apparitions, pinched, 
Parched, craving, unsatisfied, 
But only their own faces.
The cursive crawl, the squared-off characters   
these by themselves delight, even without   
a meaning, in a foreign language, in 
Chinese, for instance, or when skaters curve   
all day across the lake, scoring their white   
records in ice. Being intelligible, 
these winding ways with their audacities   
and delicate hesitations, they become   
miraculous, so intimately, out there 
at the pen’s point or brush’s tip, do world   
and spirit wed. The small bones of the wrist   
balance against great skeletons of stars   
exactly; the blind bat surveys his way   
by echo alone. Still, the point of style   
is character. The universe induces 
a different tremor in every hand, from the   
check-forger’s to that of the Emperor 
Hui Tsung, who called his own calligraphy   
the ‘Slender Gold.’ A nervous man 
writes nervously of a nervous world, and so on. 
Miraculous. It is as though the world 
were a great writing. Having said so much,   
let us allow there is more to the world   
than writing: continental faults are not   
bare convoluted fissures in the brain.   
Not only must the skaters soon go home;   
also the hard inscription of their skates 
is scored across the open water, which long   
remembers nothing, neither wind nor wake. 
The sorrow of true love is a great sorrow
And true love parting blackens a bright morrow:
Yet almost they equal joys, since their despair
Is but hope blinded by its tears, and clear
Above the storm the heavens wait to be seen.
But greater sorrow from less love has been
That can mistake lack of despair for hope
And knows not tempest and the perfect scope
Of summer, but a frozen drizzle perpetual
Of drops that from remorse and pity fall
And cannot ever shine in the sun or thaw,
Removed eternally from the sun’s law.
There’s just no accounting for happiness, 
or the way it turns up like a prodigal 
who comes back to the dust at your feet 
having squandered a fortune far away. 
And how can you not forgive? 
You make a feast in honor of what 
was lost, and take from its place the finest 
garment, which you saved for an occasion 
you could not imagine, and you weep night and day 
to know that you were not abandoned, 
that happiness saved its most extreme form 
for you alone. 
No, happiness is the uncle you never 
knew about, who flies a single-engine plane 
onto the grassy landing strip, hitchhikes 
into town, and inquires at every door 
until he finds you asleep midafternoon 
as you so often are during the unmerciful 
hours of your despair. 
It comes to the monk in his cell. 
It comes to the woman sweeping the street 
with a birch broom, to the child 
whose mother has passed out from drink. 
It comes to the lover, to the dog chewing 
a sock, to the pusher, to the basketmaker, 
and to the clerk stacking cans of carrots 
in the night. 
                     It even comes to the boulder 
in the perpetual shade of pine barrens, 
to rain falling on the open sea, 
to the wineglass, weary of holding wine. 
All night the sound had
 come back again,
 and again falls
 this quiet, persistent rain.
 What am I to myself
 that must be remembered,
 insisted upon
 so often? Is it
 that never the ease,
 even the hardness,
 of rain falling
 will have for me
 something other than this,
 something not so insistent—
 am I to be locked in this
 final uneasiness.
 Love, if you love me,
 lie next to me.
 Be for me, like rain,
 the getting out
 of the tiredness, the fatuousness, the semi-
 lust of intentional indifference.
 Be wet
 with a decent happiness. 
Give all to love; 
Obey thy heart; 
Friends, kindred, days, 
Estate, good-fame, 
Plans, credit and the Muse,— 
Nothing refuse. 
’T is a brave master; 
Let it have scope: 
Follow it utterly, 
Hope beyond hope: 
High and more high 
It dives into noon, 
With wing unspent, 
Untold intent: 
But it is a god, 
Knows its own path 
And the outlets of the sky. 
It was never for the mean; 
It requireth courage stout. 
Souls above doubt, 
Valor unbending, 
It will reward,— 
They shall return 
More than they were, 
And ever ascending. 
Leave all for love; 
Yet, hear me, yet, 
One word more thy heart behoved, 
One pulse more of firm endeavor,— 
Keep thee to-day, 
To-morrow, forever, 
Free as an Arab 
Of thy beloved. 
Cling with life to the maid; 
But when the surprise, 
First vague shadow of surmise 
Flits across her bosom young, 
Of a joy apart from thee, 
Free be she, fancy-free; 
Nor thou detain her vesture’s hem, 
Nor the palest rose she flung 
From her summer diadem. 
Though thou loved her as thyself, 
As a self of purer clay, 
Though her parting dims the day, 
Stealing grace from all alive; 
Heartily know, 
When half-gods go,   
The gods arrive. 
The wild winds weep, 
         And the night is a-cold; 
Come hither, Sleep, 
         And my griefs infold: 
But lo! the morning peeps 
         Over the eastern steeps, 
And the rustling birds of dawn 
The earth do scorn. 
Lo! to the vault 
         Of paved heaven, 
With sorrow fraught 
         My notes are driven: 
They strike the ear of night, 
         Make weep the eyes of day; 
They make mad the roaring winds, 
         And with tempests play. 
Like a fiend in a cloud 
         With howling woe, 
After night I do croud, 
         And with night will go; 
I turn my back to the east, 
From whence comforts have increas'd; 
For light doth seize my brain 
With frantic pain. 
Touching your goodness, I am like a man 
Who turns a letter over in his hand 
And you might think this was because the hand 
Was unfamiliar but, truth is, the man 
Has never had a letter from anyone; 
And now he is both afraid of what it means 
And ashamed because he has no other means 
To find out what it says than to ask someone. 
His uncle could have left the farm to him, 
Or his parents died before he sent them word, 
Or the dark girl changed and want him for beloved. 
Afraid and letter-proud, he keeps it with him. 
What would you call his feeling for the words 
That keep him rich and orphaned and beloved? 
for Arthur FreemanPigfoot (with Aces Under) Passes 
The heat’s on the hooker.   
Drop’s on the lam. 
Cops got Booker. 
Who give a damn? 
The Kid’s been had   
But not me yet. 
Dad’s in his pad.   
No sweat. 
Margaret Are You Drug 
Cool it Mag. 
Sure it’s a drag 
With all that green flaked out. 
Next thing you know they’ll be changing the color of bread. 
But look, Chick,   
Why panic? 
Sevennyeighty years, we’ll all be dead. 
Roll with it, Kid.   
I did. 
Give it the old benefit of the doubt. 
I mean leaves   
Schmeaves. 
You sure you aint just feeling sorry for yourself? 
Lamb 
Lamb, what makes you tick? 
You got a wind-up, a Battery-Powered,   
A flywheel, a plug-in, or what? 
You made out of real Reelfur? 
You fall out the window you bust?   
You shrink? Turn into a No-No? 
Zip open and have pups? 
I bet you better than that. 
I bet you put out by some other outfit. 
I bet you don’t do nothin.   
I bet you somethin to eat. 
Daddy Gander’s New Found Runes 
Rain, rain, grow the hay. 
Grow the weeds another day.   
If I die before I wake, 
Skip it. 
Little Boy Blue come blow. 
   Can’t Man; learning a new instrument. 
What’s with the old one? Where’d you get the new one?   
   Found it in a haystack Man. 
Old Mother Hubbard,   
Decently covered, 
Went to her final reward. 
She had to laugh.   
Manger was half   
Empty and half kennel. 
Ol’ Shep. At it   
Again. Livin’ on   
Principal. 
I fired a missile up. 
It came down maybe. 
Maybe it stayed up. 
Things aint much like they used to be. 
Somewhere, someone is asking a question, 
and I stand squinting at the classroom 
with one hand cupped behind my ear, 
trying to figure out where that voice is coming from. 
I might be already an old man, 
attempting to recall the night 
his hearing got misplaced, 
front-row-center at a battle of the bands, 
where a lot of leather-clad, second-rate musicians,   
amped up to dinosaur proportions, 
test drove their equipment through our ears.   
Each time the drummer threw a tantrum, 
the guitarist whirled and sprayed us with machine-gun riffs,   
as if they wished that they could knock us 
quite literally dead. 
We called that fun in 1970, 
when we weren’t sure our lives were worth surviving. 
I’m here to tell you that they were,   
and many of us did, despite ourselves,   
though the road from there to here 
is paved with dead brain cells, 
parents shocked to silence, 
and squad cars painting the whole neighborhood   
the quaking tint and texture of red jelly. 
Friends, we should have postmarks on our foreheads   
to show where we have been; 
we should have pointed ears, or polka-dotted skin   
to show what we were thinking 
when we hot-rodded over God’s front lawn,   
and Death kept blinking. 
But here I stand, an average-looking man   
staring at a room 
where someone blond in braids   
with a beautiful belief in answers   
is still asking questions. 
Through the silence in my dead ear,   
I can almost hear the future whisper   
to the past: it says that this is not a test   
and everybody passes. 
Clear night, thumb-top of a moon, a back-lit sky. 
Moon-fingers lay down their same routine 
On the side deck and the threshold, the white keys and the black keys. 
Bird hush and bird song. A cassia flower falls. 
I want to be bruised by God. 
I want to be strung up in a strong light and singled out. 
I want to be stretched, like music wrung from a dropped seed.   
I want to be entered and picked clean. 
And the wind says “What?” to me. 
And the castor beans, with their little earrings of death, say “What?” to me. 
And the stars start out on their cold slide through the dark.   
And the gears notch and the engines wheel. 
My long two-pointed ladder's sticking through a tree 
Toward heaven still, 
And there's a barrel that I didn't fill 
Beside it, and there may be two or three 
Apples I didn't pick upon some bough. 
But I am done with apple-picking now. 
Essence of winter sleep is on the night, 
The scent of apples: I am drowsing off. 
I cannot rub the strangeness from my sight 
I got from looking through a pane of glass 
I skimmed this morning from the drinking trough 
And held against the world of hoary grass. 
It melted, and I let it fall and break. 
But I was well 
Upon my way to sleep before it fell, 
And I could tell 
What form my dreaming was about to take. 
Magnified apples appear and disappear, 
Stem end and blossom end, 
And every fleck of russet showing clear. 
My instep arch not only keeps the ache, 
It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round. 
I feel the ladder sway as the boughs bend. 
And I keep hearing from the cellar bin 
The rumbling sound 
Of load on load of apples coming in. 
For I have had too much 
Of apple-picking: I am overtired 
Of the great harvest I myself desired. 
There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch, 
Cherish in hand, lift down, and not let fall. 
For all 
That struck the earth, 
No matter if not bruised or spiked with stubble, 
Went surely to the cider-apple heap 
As of no worth. 
One can see what will trouble 
This sleep of mine, whatever sleep it is. 
Were he not gone, 
The woodchuck could say whether it's like his 
Long sleep, as I describe its coming on, 
Or just some human sleep. 
Do nothing and everything will be done,   
that's what Mr. Lao Tzu said, who walked   
around talking 2,500 years ago and   
now his books practically grow on trees   
they're so popular and if he were   
alive today beautiful women would 
rush up to him like waves lapping   
at the shores of his wisdom.   
That's the way it is, I guess: humbling. 
But if I could just unclench my fists,   
empty out my eyes, turn my mind into   
a prayer flag for the wind to play with, 
we could be brothers, him the older one   
who's seen and not done it all and me   
still unlearning, both of us slung low 
in our hammocks, our hats tipped   
forwards, hands folded neatly,   
like bamboo huts, above our hearts. 
This afternoon was the colour of water falling through sunlight; 
The trees glittered with the tumbling of leaves; 
The sidewalks shone like alleys of dropped maple leaves, 
And the houses ran along them laughing out of square, open windows. 
Under a tree in the park, 
Two little boys, lying flat on their faces, 
Were carefully gathering red berries 
To put in a pasteboard box. 
Some day there will be no war, 
Then I shall take out this afternoon 
And turn it in my fingers, 
And remark the sweet taste of it upon my palate, 
And note the crisp variety of its flights of leaves. 
To-day I can only gather it 
And put it into my lunch-box, 
For I have time for nothing 
But the endeavour to balance myself 
Upon a broken world. 
After his ham & cheese in the drape factory cafeteria,   
having slipped by the bald shipping foreman   
to ride a rattling elevator to the attic 
where doves flicker into the massive eaves 
and where piled boxes of out-of-style 
cotton and lace won’t ever be 
decorating anyone’s sun parlor windows. 
Having dozed off in that hideout he fixed 
between five four-by-six cardboard storage cartons   
while the rest of us pack Mediterranean Dreams   
and Colonial Ruffles and drapes colored like moons,   
and he wakes lost— 
shot through 
into a world of unlocked unlocking light— 
suddenly he knows where he is and feels half nuts   
and feels like killing some pigeons with a slingshot. 
That’s all, and that’s why he pokes 
his calloused fingers into the broken machinery,   
hunting for loose nuts a half inch wide— 
five greasy cold ones that warm in his pocket— 
and yanks back the snag-cut strip of inner tube   
with a nut snug at the curve to snap it   
at the soft chest of a dopey bird. 
Then the noise of pigeons flopping down   
to creosoted hardwood, and then a grin   
the guy gives me & all his other pals later.   
And afternoon tightens down on all   
our shoulders, until the shift whistle   
blasts, blowing through the plant like air   
through lace. As it always has, as it does.   
That bright. That stunned. 
Ginsberg, Ginsberg, burning bright,   
Taunter of the ultra right,   
What blink of the Buddha’s eye   
Chose the day for you to die? 
Queer pied piper, howling wild, 
Mantra-minded flower child,   
Queen of Maytime, misrule’s lord   
Bawling, Drop out! All aboard! 
Finger-cymbaled, chanting Om, 
Foe of fascist, bane of bomb, 
Proper poets’ thorn-in-side, 
Turner of a whole time’s tide, 
Who can fill your sloppy shoes? 
What a catch for Death. We lose 
Glee and sweetness, freaky light, 
Ginsberg, Ginsberg, burning bright. 
Some dictator or other had gone into exile, and now reports were coming about his regime, 
the usual crimes, torture, false imprisonment, cruelty and corruption, but then a detail: 
that the way his henchmen had disposed of enemies was by hammering nails into their skulls. 
Horror, then, what mind does after horror, after that first feeling that you’ll never catch your breath, 
mind imagines—how not be annihilated by it?—the preliminary tap, feels it in the tendons of the hand, 
feels the way you do with your nail when you’re fixing something, making something, shelves, a bed; 
the first light tap to set the slant, and then the slightly harder tap, to em-bed the tip a little more ... 
No, no more: this should be happening in myth, in stone, or paint, not in reality, not here; 
it should be an emblem of itself, not itself, something that would mean, not really have to happen, 
something to go out, expand in implication from that unmoved mass of matter in the breast; 
as in the image of an anguished face, in grief for us, not us as us, us as in a myth, a moral tale, 
a way to tell the truth that grief is limitless, a way to tell us we must always understand 
it’s we who do such things, we who set the slant, embed the tip, lift the sledge and drive the nail, 
drive the nail which is the axis upon which turns the brutal human world upon the world. 
Thin are the night-skirts left behind
                  By daybreak hours that onward creep,
                  And thin, alas! the shred of sleep
That wavers with the spirit's wind:
But in half-dreams that shift and roll
                  And still remember and forget,
My soul this hour has drawn your soul
                                 A little nearer yet.
Our lives, most dear, are never near,
                  Our thoughts are never far apart,
                  Though all that draws us heart to heart
Seems fainter now and now more clear.
To-night Love claims his full control,
                  And with desire and with regret
Is there a home where heavy earth
                  Melts to bright air that breathes no pain,
                  Where water leaves no thirst again
And springing fire is Love's new birth?
If faith long bound to one true goal
                  May there at length its hope beget,
My soul that hour shall draw your soul
                                 For ever nearer yet.
I have two daughters. 
They are all I ever wanted from the earth. 
Or almost all. 
I also wanted one piece of ground: 
One city trapped by hills. One urban river. 
An island in its element. 
So I could say mine. My own. 
And mean it. 
Now they are grown up and far away 
and memory itself 
has become an emigrant, 
wandering in a place 
where love dissembles itself as landscape: 
Where the hills 
are the colours of a child's eyes, 
where my children are distances, horizons: 
At night, 
on the edge of sleep, 
I can see the shore of Dublin Bay. 
Its rocky sweep and its granite pier. 
Is this, I say 
how they must have seen it, 
backing out on the mailboat at twilight, 
shadows falling 
on everything they had to leave? 
And would love forever? 
And then 
I imagine myself 
at the landward rail of that boat 
searching for the last sight of a hand. 
I see myself 
on the underworld side of that water, 
the darkness coming in fast, saying 
all the names I know for a lost land: 
Ireland. Absence. Daughter. 
—shored 
by trees at its far ending, 
as is the way in moral tales: 
whether trees as trees actually,   
for their shadow and what   
inside of it 
hides, threatens, calls to; 
or as ever-wavering conscience,   
cloaked now, and called Chorus; 
or, between these, whatever 
falls upon the rippling and measurable,   
but none to measure it, thin 
fabric of this stands for. 
A kind of meadow, and then   
trees—many, assembled, a wood 
therefore. Through the wood   
the worn 
path, emblematic of Much 
Trespass: Halt. Who goes there?  
A kind of meadow, where it ends   
begin trees, from whose twinning 
of late light and the already underway   
darkness you were expecting perhaps   
the stag to step forward, to make 
of its twelve-pointed antlers 
the branching foreground to a backdrop   
all branches; 
or you wanted the usual 
bird to break cover at that angle   
at which wings catch entirely 
what light’s left, 
so that for once the bird isn’t miracle   
at all, but the simplicity of patience 
and a good hand assembling: first   
the thin bones, now in careful   
rows the feathers, like fretwork, 
now the brush, for the laying-on   
of sheen.... As is always the way, 
you tell yourself, in 
poems—Yes, always,   
until you have gone there,   
and gone there, “into the 
field,” vowing Only until   
In musty light, in the thin brown air   
of damp carpet, doll heads and rust,   
beneath long rows of sharp footfalls   
like nails in a lid, an old man stands   
trying on glasses, lifting each pair 
from the box like a glittering fish   
and holding it up to the light 
of a dirty bulb. Near him, a heap   
of enameled pans as white as skulls   
looms in the catacomb shadows,   
and old toilets with dry red throats   
cough up bouquets of curtain rods. 
You’ve seen him somewhere before.   
He’s wearing the green leisure suit   
you threw out with the garbage,   
and the Christmas tie you hated,   
and the ventilated wingtip shoes   
you found in your father’s closet   
and wore as a joke. And the glasses   
which finally fit him, through which   
he looks to see you looking back— 
two mirrors which flash and glance— 
are those through which one day 
you too will look down over the years,   
when you have grown old and thin   
and no longer particular, 
and the things you once thought   
you were rid of forever 
have taken you back in their arms. 
                     colored pictures 
of all things to eat: dirty 
postcards 
               And words, words, words   
all over everything 
                                              No eyes or ears left   
to do their own doings (all 
invaded, appropriated, outraged, all senses 
including the mind, that worker on what is 
                                                                  And that other sense   
made to give even the most wretched, or any of us, wretched, 
that consolation (greased 
                                        lulled   
even the street-cars 
song 
An evil spirit, your beauty, haunts me still,
Wherewith, alas, I have been long possess'd,
Which ceaseth not to tempt me to each ill,
Nor gives me once but one poor minute's rest.
In me it speaks, whether I sleep or wake;
And when by means to drive it out I try,
With greater torments then it me doth take,
And tortures me in most extremity.
Before my face it lays down my despairs,
And hastes me on unto a sudden death;
Now tempting me to drown myself in tears,
And then in sighing to give up my breath.
Thus am I still provok'd to every evil
By this good-wicked spirit, sweet angel-devil. 
My red pickup choked on burnt oil
as I drove down Highway 99.
In wind-tattered garbage bags
I had packed my whole life:
two pairs of jeans, a few T-shirts,
an a pair of work boots.
My truck needed work, and through
the blue smoke rising from under the hood,
I saw almond orchards, plums,
and raisins spread out on paper trays,
and acres of Mendota cotton my mother picked as a child.
My mother crawled through the furrows
and plucked cotton balls that filled
the burlap sack she dragged,
shoulder-slung, through dried-up bolls, 
husks, weevils, dirt clods,
and dust that filled the air with thirst.
But when she grew tired,
she slept on her mother’s burlap,
stuffed thick as a mattress,
and Grandma dragged her over the land
where time was told by the setting sun. . . .
History cried out to me from the earth,
in the scream of starling flight,
and pounded at the hulls of seeds to be set free.
History licked the asphalt with rubber,
sighed in the windows of abandoned barns,
slumped in the wind-blasted palms,
groaned in the heat, and whispered its soft curses. 
I wanted my own history—not the earth’s,
nor the history of blood, nor of memory,
and not the job founded for me at Galdini Sausage.
I sought my own—a new bruise to throb hard
as the asphalt that pounded the chassis of my truck. 
Since I am coming to that holy room, 
         Where, with thy choir of saints for evermore, 
I shall be made thy music; as I come 
         I tune the instrument here at the door, 
         And what I must do then, think here before. 
Whilst my physicians by their love are grown 
         Cosmographers, and I their map, who lie 
Flat on this bed, that by them may be shown 
         That this is my south-west discovery, 
      Per fretum febris, by these straits to die, 
I joy, that in these straits I see my west; 
         For, though their currents yield return to none, 
What shall my west hurt me? As west and east 
         In all flat maps (and I am one) are one, 
         So death doth touch the resurrection. 
Is the Pacific Sea my home? Or are 
         The eastern riches? Is Jerusalem? 
Anyan, and Magellan, and Gibraltar, 
         All straits, and none but straits, are ways to them, 
         Whether where Japhet dwelt, or Cham, or Shem. 
We think that Paradise and Calvary, 
         Christ's cross, and Adam's tree, stood in one place; 
Look, Lord, and find both Adams met in me; 
         As the first Adam's sweat surrounds my face, 
         May the last Adam's blood my soul embrace. 
So, in his purple wrapp'd, receive me, Lord; 
         By these his thorns, give me his other crown; 
And as to others' souls I preach'd thy word, 
         Be this my text, my sermon to mine own: 
"Therefore that he may raise, the Lord throws down." 
Here, she said, put this on your head.
She handed me a hat.
You ’bout as white as your dad,
and you gone stay like that.
Some say it’s in the reptilian dance   
of the purple-tongued sand goanna,   
for there the magnificent translation   
of tenacity into bone and grace occurs. 
And some declare it to be an expansive   
desert—solid rust-orange rock 
like dusk captured on earth in stone— 
simply for the perfect contrast it provides   
to the blue-grey ridge of rain 
in the distant hills. 
Some claim the harmonics of shifting   
electron rings to be most rare and some   
the complex motion of seven sandpipers   
bisecting the arcs and pitches 
of come and retreat over the mounting   
hayfield. 
Others, for grandeur, choose the terror   
of lightning peals on prairies or the tall   
collapsing cathedrals of stormy seas,   
because there they feel dwarfed 
and appropriately helpless; others select   
the serenity of that ceiling/cellar 
of stars they see at night on placid lakes,   
because there they feel assured 
and universally magnanimous. 
But it is the dark emptiness contained   
in every next moment that seems to me   
the most singularly glorious gift, 
that void which one is free to fill 
with processions of men bearing burning 
cedar knots or with parades of blue horses,   
belled and ribboned and stepping sideways,   
with tumbling white-faced mimes or companies   
of black-robed choristers; to fill simply   
with hammered silver teapots or kiln-dried   
crockery, tangerine and almond custards,   
polonaises, polkas, whittling sticks, wailing   
walls; that space large enough to hold all   
invented blasphemies and pieties, 10,000   
definitions of god and more, never fully   
filled, never. 
It was a picture I had after the war. 
A bombed English church. I was too young   
to know the word English or war, 
but I knew the picture. 
The ruined city still seemed noble.   
The cathedral with its roof blown off 
was not less godly. The church was the same   
plus rain and sky. Birds flew in and out   
of the holes God’s fist made in the walls.   
All our desire for love or children   
is treated like rags by the enemy. 
I knew so much and sang anyway.   
Like a bird who will sing until 
it is brought down. When they take   
away the trees, the child picks up a stick   
and says, this is a tree, this the house 
and the family. As we might. Through a door   
of what had been a house, into the field   
of rubble, walks a single lamb, tilting   
its head, curious, unafraid, hungry. 
a labyrinth, 
as if at its center, 
god would be there— 
but at the center, only rose, 
where rose came from,   
where rose grows— 
& us, inside of the lips & lips: 
the likenesses, the eyes, & the hair, 
we are born of, 
fed by, & marry with, 
only flesh itself, only its passage 
—out of where?    to where? 
Then god the mother said to Jim, in a dream, 
Never mind you, Jim, 
come rest again on the country porch of my knees. 
My heart is like a singing bird 
                  Whose nest is in a water'd shoot; 
My heart is like an apple-tree 
                  Whose boughs are bent with thickset fruit; 
My heart is like a rainbow shell 
                  That paddles in a halcyon sea; 
My heart is gladder than all these 
                  Because my love is come to me. 
Raise me a dais of silk and down; 
                  Hang it with vair and purple dyes; 
Carve it in doves and pomegranates, 
                  And peacocks with a hundred eyes; 
Work it in gold and silver grapes, 
                  In leaves and silver fleurs-de-lys; 
Because the birthday of my life 
                  Is come, my love is come to me. 
I went to the dances at Chandlerville, 
And played snap-out at Winchester. 
One time we changed partners, 
Driving home in the moonlight of middle June, 
And then I found Davis. 
We were married and lived together for seventy years, 
Enjoying, working, raising the twelve children, 
Eight of whom we lost 
Ere I had reached the age of sixty. 
I spun, I wove, I kept the house, I nursed the sick, 
I made the garden, and for holiday 
Rambled over the fields where sang the larks, 
And by Spoon River gathering many a shell, 
And many a flower and medicinal weed — 
Shouting to the wooded hills, singing to the green valleys. 
At ninety-six I had lived enough, that is all, 
And passed to a sweet repose. 
What is this I hear of sorrow and weariness, 
Anger, discontent and drooping hopes? 
Degenerate sons and daughters, 
Life is too strong for you — 
It takes life to love Life. 
We tied branches to our helmets. 
We painted our faces & rifles 
with mud from a riverbank, 
blades of grass hung from the pockets 
of our tiger suits. We wove 
ourselves into the terrain, 
content to be a hummingbird’s target. 
We hugged bamboo & leaned 
against a breeze off the river, 
slow-dragging with ghosts 
from Saigon to Bangkok, 
with women left in doorways 
reaching in from America. 
We aimed at dark-hearted songbirds. 
In our way station of shadows 
rock apes tried to blow our cover, 
throwing stones at the sunset. Chameleons 
crawled our spines, changing from day 
to night: green to gold, 
gold to black. But we waited 
till the moon touched metal, 
till something almost broke 
inside us. VC struggled 
with the hillside, like black silk 
wrestling iron through grass. 
We weren’t there. The river ran 
through our bones. Small animals took refuge 
against our bodies; we held our breath, 
ready to spring the L-shaped 
ambush, as a world revolved 
under each man’s eyelid. 
Two women on the lone wet strand
   (The wind's out with a will to roam)
The waves wage war on rocks and sand, 
   (And a ship is long due home.)
The sea sprays in the women's eyes—
   (Hearts can writhe like the sea's wild foam)
Lower descend the tempestuous skies,
   (For the wind's out with a will to roam.)
"O daughter, thine eyes be better than mine,"
   (The waves ascend high as yonder dome)
"North or south is there never a sign?"
They watched there all the long night through—
Wind and rain and sorrow for two—
   (And heaven on the long reach home.) 
Love bade me welcome. Yet my soul drew backLove bade me welcome. Yet my soul drew back compare Song of Solomon 5:6. "I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had with drawen himself" (Authorized Version, 1611). "Bade" is past tense of "bid," and in Herbert's time was pronounced like "bad." 
                              Guilty of dust and sin.
 But quick-eyed Love, observing me grow slackslack hesitant. Compare Herbert's use of the word in his poem The Church-Porch: "Who keeps no guard upon himself, is slack, / And rots to nothing at the next great thaw." (Perirrhanterium 24, lines 139-140) 
                             From my first entrance in,
 Drew nearer to me, sweetly questioning,
                             If I lacked any thing.If I lacked any thing. echoes a version of Psalm 23, which begins: "The Lorde is my shepehearde: therfore can I lack nothing" (Psalms in the Version of the Great Bible, 1539)
 A guest, I answered, worthy to be here:
                             Love said, You shall be he.
 I the unkindunkind undutiful., ungrateful? Ah my dearAh my dear Hopkins adopts this phrase in "The Windhover". As Norman H. MacKenzie notes, "Hopkins as an undergraduate was strongly attracted to George Herbert, an anglican divine and poet, and traces of that influence can be found throughout his writings".,
                             I cannot look on thee.
 Love took my hand, and smiling did reply,
                             Who made the eyes but I?
 Truth Lord, but I have marredmarredto mar: "to do fatal or destructive bodily harm" (OED, 4a) them: let my shame
                             Go where it doth deserve.
 And know you not, says Love, who bore the blame?
                             My dear, then I will serveI will serve compare Luke 12:37. "Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he commeth, shall find watching: Verily, I say unto you, That he shall gird himself, and make them to sit downe to meat, and will come foorth and serve them." (Authorized Version, 1611) Compare also to the second stanza of Herbert's poem "Faith": "Hungry I was, and had no meat: / I did conceit a most delicious feast; / I had it straight, and did as truly eat, / As ever did a welcome guest.".
 You must sit down, says Love, and taste my meat: You must sit down, says Love, and taste my meat:  compare Luke 12:37. "Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he commeth, shall find watching: Verily, I say unto you, That he shall gird himself, and make them to sit downe to meat, and will come foorth and serve them." (Authorized Version, 1611) Compare also to the second stanza of Herbert's poem "Faith": "Hungry I was, and had no meat: / I did conceit a most delicious feast; / I had it straight, and did as truly eat, / As ever did a welcome guest."
                             So I did sit and eat.So I did sit and eat. compare Luke 12:37. "Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he commeth, shall find watching: Verily, I say unto you, That he shall gird himself, and make them to sit downe to meat, and will come foorth and serve them." (Authorized Version, 1611) Compare also to the second stanza of Herbert's poem "Faith": "Hungry I was, and had no meat: / I did conceit a most delicious feast; / I had it straight, and did as truly eat, / As ever did a welcome guest." 
The American eagle is not aware he is
the American eagle. He is never tempted
to look modest.
When orators advertise the American eagle’s
virtues, the American eagle is not listening.
This is his virtue.
He is somewhere else, he is mountains away
but even if he were near he would never
make an audience.
The American eagle never says he will serve
if drafted, will dutifully serve etc. He is
not at our service.
If we have honored him we have honored one
who unequivocally honors himself by
overlooking us.
He does not know the meaning of magnificent.
Perhaps we do not altogether either
who cannot touch him. 
pues estoy creando spanglish
bi-cultural systems
scientific lexicographical
inter-textual integrations
two expressions
existentially wired
two dominant languages
continentally abrazándose
en colloquial combate
en las aceras del soil
imperio spanglish emerges
control pandillaje
sobre territorio bi-lingual 
las novelas mexicanas
mixing with radiorocknroll
condimented cocina lore
immigrant/migrant
nasal mispronouncements
baraja chismeteos social club
hip-hop prieto street salsa
corner soul enmixturando
spanish pop farándula
standard english classroom
with computer technicalities
spanglish is literally perfect
spanglish is ethnically snobbish
spanglish is cara-holy inteligencia
which u.s. slang do you speak? 
The summer of nineteen eighteen   
I read The Jungle and The 
Research Magnificent. That fall   
My father died and my aunt   
Took me to Chicago to live.   
The first thing I did was to take   
A streetcar to the stockyards.   
In the winter afternoon,   
Gritty and fetid, I walked 
Through the filthy snow, through the   
Squalid streets, looking shyly   
Into the people’s faces, 
Those who were home in the daytime.   
Debauched and exhausted faces,   
Starved and looted brains, faces   
Like the faces in the senile   
And insane wards of charity   
Hospitals. Predatory 
Faces of little children. 
Then as the soiled twilight darkened,   
Under the green gas lamps, and the   
Sputtering purple arc lamps,   
The faces of the men coming 
Home from work, some still alive with   
The last pulse of hope or courage,   
Some sly and bitter, some smart and   
Silly, most of them already   
Broken and empty, no life,   
Only blinding tiredness, worse   
Than any tired animal.   
The sour smells of a thousand   
Suppers of fried potatoes and   
Fried cabbage bled into the street.   
I was giddy and sick, and out   
Of my misery I felt rising   
A terrible anger and out 
Of the anger, an absolute vow.   
Today the evil is clean 
And prosperous, but it is   
Everywhere, you don’t have to   
Take a streetcar to find it, 
And it is the same evil. 
And the misery, and the 
Anger, and the vow are the same. 
He was a big man, says the size of his shoes
on a pile of broken dishes by the house; 
a tall man too, says the length of the bed
in an upstairs room; and a good, God-fearing man,
 says the Bible with a broken back
on the floor below the window, dusty with sun;
but not a man for farming, say the fields
cluttered with boulders and the leaky barn.
A woman lived with him, says the bedroom wall
papered with lilacs and the kitchen shelves
covered with oilcloth, and they had a child,
says the sandbox made from a tractor tire.
Money was scarce, say the jars of plum preserves
and canned tomatoes sealed in the cellar hole.
And the winters cold, say the rags in the window frames.
It was lonely here, says the narrow country road.
Something went wrong, says the empty house
in the weed-choked yard. Stones in the fields
say he was not a farmer; the still-sealed jars
in the cellar say she left in a nervous haste.
And the child? Its toys are strewn in the yard
like branches after a storm—a rubber cow,
a rusty tractor with a broken plow,
a doll in overalls. Something went wrong, they say. 
Bright star, would I were stedfast as thou art— 
         Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night 
And watching, with eternal lids apart, 
         Like nature's patient, sleepless Eremite, 
The moving waters at their priestlike task 
         Of pure ablution round earth's human shores, 
Or gazing on the new soft-fallen mask 
         Of snow upon the mountains and the moors— 
No—yet still stedfast, still unchangeable, 
         Pillow'd upon my fair love's ripening breast, 
To feel for ever its soft fall and swell, 
         Awake for ever in a sweet unrest, 
Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath, 
And so live ever—or else swoon to death. 
Call the roller of big cigars, 
The muscular one, and bidbid Command, order, direct him whip 
In kitchen cups concupiscent concupiscent Sensual, desirous curds. 
Let the wenches wenches Girls dawdle in such dress 
As they are used to wear, and let the boys 
Bring flowers in last month's newspapers. 
Let be be finale of seem.Let be be finale of seem. A possible literal paraphrase of this sentence might read “Let artifice and illusion give way to plain reality.” 
 The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream. The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream. In the context of death, an echo of Hamlet's comment to Claudius: “Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots.” (Hamlet, act 4, scene 3) 
Take from the dresser of dealdeal Cheap pine or fir wood, 
Lacking the three glass knobs, that sheet 
On which she embroidered fantailsfantails Birds with a fan-shaped tail once 
And spread it so as to cover her face. 
If her horny feet protrude, they come 
To show how cold she is, and dumb. 
Let the lamp affix its beam. 
The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream. 
Before the moths have even appeared
to orbit around them, the streetlamps come on,
a long row of them glowing uselessly
along the ring of garden that circles the city center,
where your steps count down the dulling of daylight.
At your feet, a bee crawls in small circles like a toy unwinding.
Summer specializes in time, slows it down almost to dream.
And the noisy day goes so quiet you can hear
the bedraggled man who visits each trash receptacle
mutter in disbelief: Everything in the world is being thrown away!
Summer lingers, but it’s about ending. It’s about how things
redden and ripen and burst and come down. It’s when
city workers cut down trees, demolishing
one limb at a time, spilling the crumbs
of twigs and leaves all over the tablecloth of street.
Sunglasses! the man softly exclaims
while beside him blooms a large gray rose of pigeons
huddled around a dropped piece of bread. 
I shot an arrow into the air, 
It fell to earth, I knew not where; 
For, so swiftly it flew, the sight 
Could not follow it in its flight. 
I breathed a song into the air, 
For who has sight so keen and strong, 
That it can follow the flight of song? 
Long, long afterward, in an oak 
I found the arrow, still unbroke; 
And the song, from beginning to end, 
I found again in the heart of a friend. 
they thought the field was wasting 
and so they gathered the marker rocks and stones and 
piled them into a barn    they say that the rocks were shaped 
some of them scratched with triangles and other forms    they 
must have been trying to invent some new language they say 
the rocks went to build that wall there guarding the manor and 
some few were used for the state house 
crops refused to grow 
i say the stones marked an old tongue and it was called eternity 
and pointed toward the river    i say that after that collection 
no pillow in the big house dreamed    i say that somewhere under 
here moulders one called alice whose great grandson is old now 
too and refuses to talk about slavery    i say that at the 
masters table only one plate is set for supper    i say no seed 
can flourish on this ground once planted then forsaken    wild 
berries warm a field of bones 
bloom how you must i say 
For Ana MenendezIt only takes one night with the wind on its knees 
to imagine Carl Sandburg unfolding 
a map of Chicago, puzzled, then walking the wrong way. 
The lines on his face are hard to read. I alternate 
between the tv, where a plastic surgeon is claiming 
that every facial expression causes wrinkles, and 
the newspaper. I picture the surgeon reading the lines 
on Sandburg’s face, lines that would’ve made more sense 
if the poet had been, say, a tree growing 
in a wind orchard. Maybe he simply smiled too much. 
I’m reading about the All-Star game, thinking 
that maybe Sandburg saw the White Sox of 1919. 
. . .
I love American newspapers, the way each section 
is folded independently and believes it owns 
the world. There’s this brief item in the inter- 
national pages: the Chinese government has posted 
signs in Tiananmen Square, forbidding laughter. 
I’m sure the plastic surgeon would approve, he’d say 
the Chinese will look young much longer, their faces 
unnaturally smooth, but what I see (although 
no photograph accompanies the story) is laughter 
bursting inside them. I go back to the sports section 
and a closeup of a rookie in mid-swing, his face 
keeping all the wrong emotions in check. 
When I read I bite my lower lip, a habit 
the plastic surgeon would probably call 
cosmetic heresy because it accelerates the aging 
process. I think of Carl Sandburg and the White Sox; 
I think of wind in Tiananmen Square, how a country 
deprived of laughter ages invisibly; I think 
of the Great Walls of North America, each of them 
a grip on some outfield like a rookie’s hands 
around a bat when the wind is against him; I bite 
my lower lip again; I want to learn 
to think in American, to believe that a headline 
is a fact and all stories are suspect. 
A castaway blown south from the arctic tundra
sits on a stump in an abandoned farmer’s field.
Beyond the dunes cattails toss and bend as snappy
as the surf, rushing and crashing down the jetty.
His head a swivel of round glances,
his eyes a deeper yellow than the winter sun,
he wonders if the spot two hundred feet away
is a mouse on the crawl from mud hole
to deer-grass patch.
An hour of wind and sleet whips the air,
nothing darts or passes but the river underground.
A North Pole creature shows us how to last.
The wind ruffles his feathers from crown to claw
while he gazes into zeroes the salt-slick rain.
As a double-rainbow before us arcs
sky and owl, we leave him surrendering
to the echo of his white refrain. 
A little candlewax on the thumbnail, liquid   
at first, slipping, then stalled to an ice-hood.   
Another layer, another, and the child lies back,   
his thumb a hummock, his small knuckle   
buckled with cracks. 
No snow yet, but 
the last white meadows of switchwort and saxifrage 
mimic it. Already the bears brush back 
through the dwarf willows—Hubbart Point, Cape Henrietta Maria, 
the bay's deep arc flattening, lessening 
as land extends through the fast-ice and the seam 
of open leads stretches, withdraws. 
They have come for the pack floes, for the slow 
rafting. And repeat on their white faces, the boy thinks,   
the low strokes of the borealis: violet mouths,   
madder blue at the eyelids. Perhaps he will walk   
to the shoreline—no shore, of course, just miles   
of land-fast ice stretched over water, stretched out   
to water, the line where each begins 
a filament, a vapor. By then the bears will be 
sailors, or, far to the north, stalled in their waxy sleep.   
He yawns, looks down at his slipper, his floormat   
of braided fleece. By then the lights 
will be thicker, greens and magentas flashing, rolling in 
at times like fog. To go where nothing lives. 
He turns, settles. To extend a little breath 
out over that ice—the white, cumbersome bodies   
migrating in reverse with the others, dragging   
between them a lifeline, plump and intricate, 
like a net, like purse seiners dragging a cork net,   
its great arc spiraling, tighter, tighter, 
now green in those lights, now blue, now   
pink as the boy's ear, 
where all night a line of cold 
traces the rim, the lobe, 
circles down, chills, and recedes. 
Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books; 
Or surely you'll grow double: 
Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks; 
Why all this toil and trouble? 
The sun above the mountain's head, 
A freshening lustre mellow 
Through all the long green fields has spread, 
His first sweet evening yellow. 
Books! 'tis a dull and endless strife: 
Come, hear the woodland linnet, 
How sweet his music! on my life, 
There's more of wisdom in it. 
And hark! how blithe the throstle sings! 
He, too, is no mean preacher: 
Come forth into the light of things, 
Let Nature be your teacher. 
She has a world of ready wealth, 
Our minds and hearts to bless— 
Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health, 
Truth breathed by cheerfulness. 
One impulse from a vernal wood 
May teach you more of man, 
Of moral evil and of good, 
Than all the sages can. 
Sweet is the lore which Nature brings; 
Our meddling intellect 
Mis-shapes the beauteous forms of things:— 
We murder to dissect. 
Enough of Science and of Art; 
Close up those barren leaves; 
Come forth, and bring with you a heart 
That watches and receives. 
I remember, I remember, 
The house where I was born, 
The little window where the sun 
Came peeping in at morn; 
He never came a wink too soon, 
Nor brought too long a day, 
But now, I often wish the night 
Had borne my breath away! 
The roses, red and white, 
The vi'lets, and the lily-cups, 
Those flowers made of light! 
The lilacs where the robin built, 
And where my brother set 
The laburnum on his birthday,— 
The tree is living yet! 
Where I was used to swing, 
And thought the air must rush as fresh 
To swallows on the wing; 
My spirit flew in feathers then, 
That is so heavy now, 
And summer pools could hardly cool 
The fever on my brow! 
The fir trees dark and high; 
I used to think their slender tops 
Were close against the sky: 
It was a childish ignorance, 
But now 'tis little joy 
To know I'm farther off from heav'n 
Than when I was a boy. 
Oh pile of white shirts who is coming 
to breathe in your shapes to carry your numbers   
to appear 
what hearts 
are moving toward their garments here 
their days 
what troubles beating between arms 
you look upward through 
each other saying nothing has happened   
and it has gone away and is sleeping   
having told the same story 
and we exist from within 
eyes of the gods 
you lie on your backs 
and the wounds are not made   
the blood has not heard 
the boat has not turned to stone   
and the dark wires to the bulb 
are full of the voice of the unborn 
Follow thy fair sun, unhappy shadow, 
Though thou be black as night 
And she made all of light, 
Yet follow thy fair sun unhappy shadow. 
Follow her whose light thy light depriveth, 
Though here thou liv’st disgraced, 
And she in heaven is placed, 
Yet follow her whose light the world reviveth. 
Follow those pure beams whose beauty burneth, 
That so have scorched thee, 
As thou still black must be, 
Till Her kind beams thy black to brightness turneth. 
Follow her while yet her glory shineth, 
There comes a luckless night, 
That will dim all her light, 
And this the black unhappy shade divineth. 
Follow still since so thy fates ordained, 
The Sun must have his shade, 
Till both at once do fade, 
The Sun still proved, the shadow still disdained.
Poetry Out Loud Note: In the print anthology, this poem is titled "Follow thy fair sun, unhappy shadow." The student may give either title during the recitation. 
On humming rubber along this white concrete,
lighthearted between the gravities
of source and destination like a man
halfway to the moon
in this bubble of tuneless whistling
at seventy miles an hour from the windvents,
over prairie swells rising
and falling, over the quick offramp
that drops to its underpass and the truck
thundering beneath as I cross
with the country music twanging out my windows,
I'm grooving down this highway feeling
technology is freedom's other name when
—a meadowlark
comes sailing across my windshield
with breast shining yellow
and five notes pierce
the windroar like a flash
of nectar on mind,
gone as the country music swells up and drops
                                me wheeling down
                      my notch of cement-bottomed sky
                             between home and away
and wanting
to move again through country that a bird
has defined wholly with song,
and maybe next time see how
                         he flies so easy, when he sings. 
Since there is no escape, since at the end
    My body will be utterly destroyed, 
This hand I love as I have loved a friend,
    This body I tended, wept with and enjoyed; 
Since there is no escape even for me
    Who love life with a love too sharp to bear: 
The scent of orchards in the rain, the sea
    And hours alone too still and sure for prayer—
Since darkness waits for me, then all the more 
Let me go down as waves sweep to the shore
    In pride, and let me sing with my last breath; 
In these few hours of light I lift my head; 
Life is my lover—I shall leave the dead
    If there is any way to baffle death. 
To pull the metal splinter from my palm 
my father recited a story in a low voice. 
I watched his lovely face and not the blade. 
Before the story ended, he’d removed 
the iron sliver I thought I’d die from. 
I can’t remember the tale, 
but hear his voice still, a well 
of dark water, a prayer. 
And I recall his hands, 
two measures of tenderness 
he laid against my face, 
the flames of discipline 
he raised above my head. 
Had you entered that afternoon 
you would have thought you saw a man 
planting something in a boy’s palm, 
a silver tear, a tiny flame. 
Had you followed that boy 
you would have arrived here, 
where I bend over my wife’s right hand. 
Look how I shave her thumbnail down 
so carefully she feels no pain. 
Watch as I lift the splinter out. 
I was seven when my father 
took my hand like this, 
and I did not hold that shard 
between my fingers and think, 
Metal that will bury me, 
christen it Little Assassin, 
Ore Going Deep for My Heart. 
And I did not lift up my wound and cry, 
Death visited here! 
I did what a child does 
when he’s given something to keep. 
I kissed my father. 
We brought that newborn home from Maimonides 
and showed her nine blue glittering streets. 
Would she like the semis with hoods of snow? 
The precinct? Bohack’s? A lit diner?
Her eyes were huge and her gaze tilted
like milk in a pan, toward shadow.
Would she like the tenement, three dim flights, 
her crib that smelled of Lemon Pledge?
We slept beside her in our long coats,
rigid with fatigue in the unmade bed.
Her breath woke us with its slight catch. 
Would she approve of gray winter dawn?
We showed her daylight in our cupped hands. 
Then the high clocks began booming
in this city and the next, we counted for her, 
but just the strokes, not the laggards
or the tinny echoes, and we taught her
how to wait, how to watch, how to be held,
in that icy room, until our own alarm chimed. 
Let us consider the farmer who makes his straw hat his   sweetheart; or the old woman who makes a floor lamp her son; or the young woman who has set herself the task of scraping her shadow off a wall....      Let us consider the old woman who wore smoked cows’ tongues for shoes and walked a meadow gathering cow chips in her apron; or a mirror grown dark with age that was given to a blind man who spent his nights looking into it, which saddened his mother, that her son should be so lost in vanity....      Let us consider the man who fried roses for his dinner, whose kitchen smelled like a burning rose garden; or the man who disguised himself as a moth and ate his overcoat, and for   dessert served himself a chilled fedora....	
I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall   
after an Indian woman puts her shoulder to the Grand Coulee Dam   
and topples it. I am told by many of you that I must forgive   
and so I shall after the floodwaters burst each successive dam   
downriver from the Grand Coulee. I am told by many of you   
that I must forgive and so I shall after the floodwaters find   
their way to the mouth of the Columbia River as it enters the Pacific   
and causes all of it to rise. I am told by many of you that I must forgive   
and so I shall after the first drop of floodwater is swallowed by that salmon   
waiting in the Pacific. I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall   
after that salmon swims upstream, through the mouth of the Columbia   
and then past the flooded cities, broken dams and abandoned reactors   
of Hanford. I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall   
after that salmon swims through the mouth of the Spokane River   
as it meets the Columbia, then upstream, until it arrives   
in the shallows of a secret bay on the reservation where I wait alone.   
I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall after   
that salmon leaps into the night air above the water, throws   
a lightning bolt at the brush near my feet, and starts the fire   
which will lead all of the lost Indians home. I am told   
by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall   
after we Indians have gathered around the fire with that salmon   
who has three stories it must tell before sunrise: one story will teach us   
how to pray; another story will make us laugh for hours;   
the third story will give us reason to dance. I am told by many   
of you that I must forgive and so I shall when I am dancing   
with my tribe during the powwow at the end of the world. 
By the stream, where the ground is soft 
and gives, under the slightest pressure—even   
the fly would leave its footprint here   
and the paw of the shrew the crescent   
of its claws like the strokes of a chisel   
in clay; where the lightest chill, lighter   
than the least rumor of winter, sets the reeds   
to a kind of speaking, and a single drop of rain   
leaves a crater to catch the first silver   
glint of sun when the clouds slide away   
from each other like two tired lovers,   
and the light returns, pale, though brightened   
by the last chapter of late autumn:   
copper, rusted oak, gold aspen, and the red 
pages of maple, the wind leafing through to the end   
the annals of beech, the slim volumes   
of birch, the elegant script of the ferns ... 
for the birds, it is all 
notations for a coda, for the otter   
an invitation to the river, 
and for the deer—a dream 
in which to disappear, light-footed   
on the still open book of earth,   
adding the marks of their passage,   
adding it all in, waiting only 
for the first thick flurry of snowflakes   
for cover, soft cover that carries   
no title, no name. 
Facing the wind of the avenues 
one spring evening in New York, 
I wore under my thin jacket 
a sweater given me by the wife 
of a genial Manchurian. 
The warmth in that sweater changed 
the indifferent city block by block. 
The buildings were mountains 
that fled as I approached them. 
The traffic became sheep and cattle 
milling in muddy pastures. 
I could feel around me the large 
movements of men and horses. 
It was spring in Siberia or Mongolia, 
wherever I happened to be. 
Rough but honest voices called to me 
out of that solitude: 
they told me we are all tired 
of this coiling weight, 
the oppression of a long winter; 
that it was time to renew our life, 
burn the expired contracts, 
elect new governments. 
The old Imperial sun has set, 
and I must write a poem to the Emperor. 
I shall speak it like the man 
I should be, an inhabitant of the frontier, 
clad in sweat-darkened wool, 
my face stained by wind and smoke. 
Surely the Emperor and his court 
will want to know what a fine 
and generous revolution begins tomorrow 
in one of his remote provinces... 
                                                    (1967) 
Stay, I said 
to the cut flowers. 
They bowed 
their heads lower.
Stay, I said to the spider, 
who fled.
Stay, leaf. 
It reddened, 
embarrassed for me and itself.
Stay, I said to my body. 
It sat as a dog does, 
obedient for a moment, 
soon starting to tremble.
Stay, to the earth 
of riverine valley meadows, 
of fossiled escarpments, 
of limestone and sandstone. 
It looked back 
with a changing expression, in silence.
Stay, I said to my loves. 
Each answered, 
Always. 
Maud went to college.   
Sadie stayed at home.   
Sadie scraped life 
With a fine-tooth comb. 
She didn’t leave a tangle in.   
Her comb found every strand. 
Sadie was one of the livingest chits   
In all the land. 
Sadie bore two babies   
Under her maiden name.   
Maud and Ma and Papa   
Nearly died of shame. 
When Sadie said her last so-long   
Her girls struck out from home.   
(Sadie had left as heritage 
Her fine-tooth comb.) 
Maud, who went to college,   
Is a thin brown mouse. 
She is living all alone 
In this old house. 
We live in secret cities 
And we travel unmapped roads. 
We speak words between us that we recognize 
But which cannot be looked up. 
They are our words. 
They come from very far inside our mouths. 
You and I, we are the secret citizens of the city 
Inside us, and inside us 
There go all the cars we have driven 
And seen, there are all the people 
We know and have known, there 
Are all the places that are 
But which used to be as well. This is where 
They went. They did not disappear. 
We each take a piece   
Through the eye and through the ear. 
It’s loud inside us, in here, and when we speak 
In the outside world 
We have to hope that some of that sound 
Does not come out, that an arm 
Does not reach out 
In place of the tongue. 
My mother saw the green tree toad 
on the window sill 
her first one 
since she was young. 
We saw it breathe 
and swell up round. 
My youth is no sure sign 
I’ll find this kind of thing 
tho it does sing. 
Let’s take it in 
I said so grandmother can see 
but she could not 
it changed to brown 
and town 
changed us, too. 
Some day, when trees have shed their leaves
     And against the morning’s white
The shivering birds beneath the eaves
     Have sheltered for the night,
We’ll turn our faces southward, love,
     Toward the summer isle
Where bamboos spire the shafted grove
     And wide-mouthed orchids smile.
And we will seek the quiet hill
     Where towers the cotton tree,
And leaps the laughing crystal rill,
     And works the droning bee.
And we will build a cottage there
     Beside an open glade,
With black-ribbed blue-bells blowing near,
     And ferns that never fade. 
New York City, 2001One night, not long after the disaster,
as our train was passing Astor,
the car door opened with a shudder
and a girl came flying down the aisle,
hair that looked to be all feathers
and a half-moon smile
making open air of our small car.
The crowd ignored her or they muttered
“Hey, excuse me” as they passed her
when the train had paused at Rector.
The specter crowed “Excuse me,” swiftly
turned, and ran back up the corridor,
then stopped for me.
We dove under the river.
She took my head between her fingers,
squeezing till the birds began to stir.
And then from out my eyes and ears
a flock came forth — I couldn’t think or hear
or breathe or see within that feather-world
so silently I thanked her.
Such things were common after the disaster. 
I have met them in dark alleys, limping and one-armed;   
I have seen them playing cards under a single light-bulb   
and tried to join in, but they refused me rudely,   
knowing I would only let them win.   
I have seen them in the foyers of theaters,   
coming back late from the interval   
long after the others have taken their seats,   
and in deserted shopping malls late at night,   
peering at things they can never buy,   
and I have found them wandering   
in a wood where I too have wandered.   
This morning I caught one;   
small and stupid, too slow to get away,   
it was only a promise I had made to myself once   
and then forgot, but it screamed and kicked at me   
and ran to join the others, who looked at me with reproach   
in their long, sad faces. 
When I drew near them, they scurried away,   
even though they will sleep in my yard tonight.   
I hate them for their ingratitude,   
I who have kept countless promises,   
as dead now as Shakespeare’s children.   
“You bastards,” I scream,   
“you have to love me—I gave you life!” 
Cold for so long, unable to speak, 
yet your mouth seems framed 
on a cry, or a stifled question. 
Who placed you here, and left you 
to this lonely eternity of ash and ice,   
and himself returned to the dust   
fields, the church and the temple? 
Was it God—the sun-god of the Incas,   
the imperial god of the Spaniards? 
Or only the priests of that god,   
self-elected—voice of the volcano 
that speaks once in a hundred years. 
And I wonder, with your image before me,   
what life might you have lived, 
had you lived at all—whose companion,   
whose love? To be perhaps no more   
than a slave of that earthly master: 
a jug of water on your shoulder, 
year after stunted year, a bundle 
of reeds and corn, kindling 
for a fire on whose buried hearth? 
There were furies to be fed, then   
as now: blood to fatten the sun, 
a heart for the lightning to strike. 
And now the furies walk the streets,   
a swarm in the milling crowd.   
They stand to the podium, speak   
of their coming ascension ... 
Through all this drift and clamor   
you have survived—in this cramped   
and haunted effigy, another entry   
on the historian’s dated page.   
Under the weight of this mountain— 
once a god, now only restless stone,   
we find your interrupted life,   
placed here among the trilobites   
and shells, so late unearthed. 
The brightly-painted horse 
Had a boy’s face, 
And four small wheels 
Under his feet, 
Plus a long string 
To pull him by this way and that 
Across the floor, 
Should you care to. 
A string in-waiting 
That slipped away 
In many wiles 
From each and every try. 
                      2 
Knock and they’ll answer, 
Mother told me. 
So I climbed four flights of stairs 
And went in unannounced. 
And found a small wooden toy 
For the taking 
In the ensuing emptiness 
And the fading daylight 
That still gives me a shudder 
As if I held the key to mysteries in my hand. 
                      3 
Where’s the Lost and Found Department, 
And the quiet entry, 
The undeveloped film 
Of the few clear moments 
Of our blurred lives? 
Where’s the drop of blood 
And the teeny nail 
That pricked my finger 
As I bent down to touch the toy 
And caught its eye? 
                      4 
Evening light, 
Make me a Sunday 
Go-to meeting shadow 
For my toy. 
My dearest memories are 
Steep stair-wells 
In dusty buildings 
On dead-end streets, 
Where I talk to the walls 
And closed doors 
As if they understood me. 
                      5 
The wooden toy sitting pretty. 
No, quieter than that. 
Like the sound of eyebrows 
Raised by a villain 
In a silent movie. 
Psst, someone said behind my back. 
I have just come down from my father. 
Higher and higher he lies 
Above me in a blue light 
Shed by a tinted window. 
I drop through six white floors 
And then step out onto pavement. 
Still feeling my father ascend, 
I start to cross the firm street, 
My shoulder blades shining with all 
The glass the huge building can raise. 
Now I must turn round and face it, 
And know his one pane from the others. 
Each window possesses the sun 
As though it burned there on a wick. 
I wave, like a man catching fire. 
All the deep-dyed windowpanes flash, 
And, behind them, all the white rooms 
They turn to the color of Heaven. 
Ceremoniously, gravely, and weakly, 
Dozens of pale hands are waving 
Back, from inside their flames. 
Yet one pure pane among these 
Is the bright, erased blankness of nothing. 
I know that my father is there, 
In the shape of his death still living. 
The traffic increases around me 
Like a madness called down on my head. 
The horns blast at me like shotguns, 
And drivers lean out, driven crazy— 
But now my propped-up father 
Lifts his arm out of stillness at last. 
The light from the window strikes me 
And I turn as blue as a soul, 
As the moment when I was born. 
I am not afraid for my father— 
Look! He is grinning; he is not 
Afraid for my life, either, 
As the wild engines stand at my knees 
Shredding their gears and roaring, 
And I hold each car in its place 
For miles, inciting its horn 
To blow down the walls of the world 
That the dying may float without fear 
In the bold blue gaze of my father. 
Slowly I move to the sidewalk 
With my pin-tingling hand half dead 
At the end of my bloodless arm. 
I carry it off in amazement, 
High, still higher, still waving, 
My recognized face fully mortal, 
Yet not; not at all, in the pale, 
Drained, otherworldly, stricken, 
Created hue of stained glass. 
      1 
Is this writing mine 
Whose name is this 
Did I underline 
What I was to miss? 
      2 
An upheaval of leaves 
Enlightens the tree 
Rooted it receives   
Gusts on a spree 
      3 
Beauty makes me sad 
Makes me grieve 
I see what I must leave 
      4 
Scaffold, gallows 
Do whose will 
Who hallows wood 
To build, kill 
      5 
Blind man, anvil 
No hammer strikes 
Your eyes are spikes 
Starspangled cowboy
sauntering out of the almost-
silly West, on your face
a porcelain grin,
tugging a papier-mâché cactus
on wheels behind you with a string,
you are innocent as a bathtub 
full of bullets.
Your righteous eyes, your laconic 
trigger-fingers
people the streets with villains:
as you move, the air in front of you 
blossoms with targets
and you leave behind you a heroic 
trail of desolation:
beer bottles
slaughtered by the side
of the road, bird-
skulls bleaching in the sunset.
I ought to be watching
from behind a cliff or a cardboard storefront 
when the shooting starts, hands clasped 
in admiration,
but I am elsewhere. 
Then what about me
what about the I
confronting you on that border, 
you are always trying to cross?
I am the horizon
you ride towards, the thing you can never lasso
I am also what surrounds you: 
my brain
scattered with your
tincans, bones, empty shells, 
the litter of your invasions.
I am the space you desecrate 
as you pass through. 
I dreamed that I was old: in stale declension   
Fallen from my prime, when company 
Was mine, cat-nimbleness, and green invention,   
Before time took my leafy hours away. 
My wisdom, ripe with body’s ruin, found   
Itself tart recompense for what was lost 
In false exchange: since wisdom in the ground   
Has no apocalypse or pentecost. 
I wept for my youth, sweet passionate young thought, 
And cozy women dead that by my side   
Once lay: I wept with bitter longing, not   
Remembering how in my youth I cried. 
O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms, 
       Alone and palely loitering? 
The sedgesedge Grasslike or rushlike plant that grows in wet areas. has withered from the lake, 
       And no birds sing. 
       So haggardhaggard Wild looking and so woe-begonebegone To happen, occur, transpire ? 
The squirrel’s granary is full, 
       And the harvest’s done. 
I see a lily on thy brow, 
       With anguish moist and fever-dew, 
And on thy cheeks a fading rose 
       Fast withereth too. 
I met a lady in the meadsmeads Meadow , 
       Full beautiful—a faery’s child, 
Her hair was long, her foot was light, 
       And her eyes were wild. 
I made a garland for her head, 
       And bracelets too, and fragrant zone; 
She looked at me as she did love, 
       And made sweet moanmade sweet moan Compare "virgin-choir to make delicious moan" from Ode to Psyche (30), written between April 21 and 30, 1819. Noted by John Barnard in John Keats: The Complete Poems (Penguin, 2003).  
I set her on my pacing steed, 
       And nothing else saw all day long, 
For sidelong would she bend, and sing 
       A faery’s song. 
She found me roots of relish sweet, 
       And honey wild, and manna-dewhoney wild, and manna-dew Echoes manna in the Bible, first described in Exodus, 16:14-21, 31. The Israelites eat the manna, a food miraculously supplied in the wilderness after the dew has lifted, in the morning: “The house of Israel called it manna; it was like coriander seed, white, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey” (Exodus 16:31, NRSV)., 
And sure in language strange she said— 
       ‘I love thee true’. 
She took me to her Elfin grotElfin grot An elf’s grotto , 
       And there she wept and sighed full sore, 
And there I shut her wild wild eyes 
       With kisses four. 
And there she lullèd me asleep, 
       And there I dreamed—Ah! woe betide!— 
The latest dream I ever dreamt 
       On the cold hill side. 
I saw pale kings and princes too, 
       Pale warriors, death-pale were they all; 
They cried—‘La Belle Dame sans MerciLa Belle Dame sans Merci This phrase—and the poem’s title—is from Alain Chartier’s courtly French ballad, “La Belle Dame sans Merci” (1424). Keats wrote the poem in a letter to George and Georgiana Keats, April 21, 1819. 
       Thee hathThee hath The version of this poem has “Thee hath” (see The Letters of John Keats, 1814-1821, ed. H. E. Rollins, 1958); though other versions of this poem reads “Hath thee” in thrall!’ 
I saw their starved lips in the gloamgloam Twilight; Keats coined the word from “gloaming”, 
       With horrid warning gapèd wide, 
And I awoke and found me here, 
       On the cold hill’s side. 
And this is why I sojournsojourn To stay or visit temporarily here, 
       Alone and palely loitering, 
Though the sedge is withered from the lake, 
To Christ our LordTo Christ our Lord This epigraph dedicated the poem to Jesus while echoing the Latin phrase, Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam, the Jesuit motto meaning “To the Greater Glory of God.”I caught this morning morning's minionminion favorite, darling; also, an underling or servant, king- 
    dom of daylight's dauphindauphin prince; a French historical term, along with “chevalier”, dapple-dawn-drawn Falcon, in his riding 
    Of the rolling level underneath him steady air, and striding 
High there, how he rung upon the rein of a wimplingwimpling rippling wing 
In his ecstasy! then off, off forth on swing, 
    As a skate's heel sweeps smooth on a bow-bend: the hurl and gliding 
    Rebuffed the big wind. My heart in hiding 
Stirred for a bird, – the achieve of, the mastery of the thing! 
Brute beauty and valour and act, oh, air, pride, plume, here 
    Buckle!Buckle! to bend, attach; prepare for flight or battle. The verb could be descriptive of the bird’s action, or it could be the speaker’s imperative.  AND the fire that breaks from thee then, a billion 
Times told lovelier, more dangerous, O my chevalier!chevalier French word for “knight” or “champion”; pronounced Chev-ah-leer, to rhyme with “here” and “dear” 
      
   No wonder of it: shéer plódshéer plód slowly, laboriously, and without break; these accent marks, inserted by Hopkins, tell the reader to place more accent or emphasis on those syllables when reading aloud makes plough down sillionsillion Fresh soil upturned by a plow (“plough”) 
Shine, and blue-bleak embers, ah my dearah my dear Compare with the same phrase in the poem “Love (III)” by George Herbert, a poet Hopkins admired., 
    Fall, gallgall to become sore, crack, or chafe themselves, and gash gold-vermilionvermilion a vibrant scarlet color. 
Retired ballerinas on winter afternoons   
          walking their dogs 
                      in Central Park West 
    (or their cats on leashes— 
       the cats themselves old highwire artists)   
The ballerinas 
                leap and pirouette 
                           through Columbus Circle   
         while winos on park benches 
               (laid back like drunken Goudonovs)   
            hear the taxis trumpet together 
               like horsemen of the apocalypse   
                               in the dusk of the gods   
It is the final witching hour 
                when swains are full of swan songs   
    And all return through the dark dusk   
                to their bright cells 
                                  in glass highrises 
      or sit down to oval cigarettes and cakes   
                              in the Russian Tea Room   
    or climb four flights to back rooms 
                                 in Westside brownstones   
               where faded playbill photos 
                        fall peeling from their frames   
                            like last year’s autumn leaves 
Life, friends, is boring. We must not say so.   
After all, the sky flashes, the great sea yearns,   
we ourselves flash and yearn, 
and moreover my mother told me as a boy   
(repeatingly) ‘Ever to confess you’re bored   
means you have no 
Inner Resources.’ I conclude now I have no   
inner resources, because I am heavy bored. 
Peoples bore me, 
literature bores me, especially great literature,   
Henry bores me, with his plights & gripes   
as bad as achilles, 
who loves people and valiant art, which bores me.   
And the tranquil hills, & gin, look like a drag   
and somehow a dog 
has taken itself & its tail considerably away 
into mountains or sea or sky, leaving            
behind: me, wag. 
Go home. It's never what you think it is, 
The kiss, the diamond, the slamdance pulse in the wrist. 
Nothing is true, my dear, not even this 
Rumor of passion you'll doubtless insist 
On perceiving in my glance. Please just 
Go. Home is never what you think it is. 
Meaning lies in meaning's absence. The mist 
Is always almost just about to lift. 
Nothing is truer. Dear, not even this 
Candle can explain its searing twist 
Of flame mounted on cool amethyst. 
Go on home—not where you think it is, 
But where you would expect its comfort least, 
In still-black stars our century will miss 
Seeing. Nothingness is not as true as this 
Faith we grind up with denial: grist 
To the midnight mill; morning's catalyst. 
Come, let's go home, wherever you think it is. 
Nothing is true, my dear. Not even this. 
Traveling through the dark I found a deer 
dead on the edge of the Wilson River road. 
It is usually best to roll them into the canyon: 
that road is narrow; to swerve might make more dead. 
By glow of the tail-light I stumbled back of the car   
and stood by the heap, a doe, a recent killing;   
she had stiffened already, almost cold. 
I dragged her off; she was large in the belly. 
My fingers touching her side brought me the reason— 
her side was warm; her fawn lay there waiting,   
alive, still, never to be born. 
Beside that mountain road I hesitated. 
The car aimed ahead its lowered parking lights;   
under the hood purred the steady engine. 
I stood in the glare of the warm exhaust turning red;   
around our group I could hear the wilderness listen. 
I thought hard for us all—my only swerving—,   
then pushed her over the edge into the river. 
What needs my Shakespeare for his honoured bones,
The labor of an age in pilèd stones,
Or that his hallowed relics should be hid   
Under a star-ypointing pyramid? 
Dear son of Memory, great heir of fame, 
What need’st thou such weak witness of thy name?
Thou in our wonder and astonishment 
Hast built thyself a live-long monument. 
For whilst to th’ shame of slow-endeavouring art,   
Thy easy numbers flow, and that each heart   
Hath from the leaves of thy unvalued book 
Those Delphic lines with deep impression took,   
Then thou, our fancy of itself bereaving,   
Dost make us marble with too much conceiving; 
And so sepúlchred in such pomp dost lie,
That kings for such a tomb would wish to die. 
Like all his people he felt at home in the forest.   
The silence beneath great trees, the dimness there,   
The distant high rustling of foliage, the clumps 
Of fern like little green fountains, patches of sunlight,   
Patches of moss and lichen, the occasional   
Undergrowth of hazel and holly, was he aware   
Of all this? On the contrary his unawareness   
Was a kind of gratification, a sense of comfort   
And repose even in the strain of running day   
After day. He had been aware of the prairies.   
He had known he hated the sky so vast, the wind   
Roaring in the grasses, and the brightness that   
Hurt his eyes. Now he hated nothing; nor could he   
Feel anything but the urgency that compelled him   
Onward continually. "May I not forget, may I   
Not forget," he said to himself over and over.   
When he saw three ravens rise on their awkward   
Wings from the forest floor perhaps seventy-five   
Ells ahead of him, he said, "Three ravens,"   
And immediately forgot them. "May I not forget,"   
He said, and repeated again in his mind the exact   
Words he had memorized, the message that was   
Important and depressing, which made him feel   
Worry and happiness at the same time, a peculiar   
Elation. At last he came to his people far   
In the darkness. He smiled and spoke his words,   
And he looked intently into their eyes gleaming 
In firelight. He cried when they cried. No rest 
For his lungs. He flinched and lay down while they   
Began to kill him with clubs and heavy stones. 
Helen, thy beauty is to me 
   Like those Nicéan barks of yore, 
That gently, o'er a perfumed sea, 
   The weary, way-worn wanderer bore 
   To his own native shore. 
On desperate seas long wont to roam, 
   Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face, 
Thy Naiad airs have brought me home 
   To the glory that was Greece,       
   And the grandeur that was Rome. 
Lo! in yon brilliant window-niche 
   How statue-like I see thee stand, 
The agate lamp within thy hand! 
   Ah, Psyche, from the regions which 
   Are Holy-Land! 
I knew a woman, lovely in her bones, 
When small birds sighed, she would sigh back at them;   
Ah, when she moved, she moved more ways than one:   
The shapes a bright container can contain! 
Of her choice virtues only gods should speak, 
Or English poets who grew up on Greek 
(I’d have them sing in chorus, cheek to cheek). 
How well her wishes went! She stroked my chin,   
She taught me Turn, and Counter-turn, and Stand;   
She taught me Touch, that undulant white skin;   
I nibbled meekly from her proffered hand;   
She was the sickle; I, poor I, the rake, 
Coming behind her for her pretty sake 
(But what prodigious mowing we did make). 
Love likes a gander, and adores a goose: 
Her full lips pursed, the errant note to seize; 
She played it quick, she played it light and loose;   
My eyes, they dazzled at her flowing knees;   
Her several parts could keep a pure repose,   
Or one hip quiver with a mobile nose 
(She moved in circles, and those circles moved). 
Let seed be grass, and grass turn into hay:   
I’m martyr to a motion not my own; 
What’s freedom for? To know eternity. 
I swear she cast a shadow white as stone.   
But who would count eternity in days? 
These old bones live to learn her wanton ways:   
(I measure time by how a body sways). 
The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold, 
And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold; 
And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea, 
When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee. 
   Like the leaves of the forest when Summer is green, 
That host with their banners at sunset were seen: 
Like the leaves of the forest when Autumn hath blown, 
That host on the morrow lay withered and strown. 
   For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast, 
And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed; 
And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill, 
And their hearts but once heaved, and for ever grew still! 
   And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide, 
But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride; 
And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf, 
And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf. 
   And there lay the rider distorted and pale, 
With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail: 
And the tents were all silent, the banners alone, 
The lances unlifted, the trumpet unblown. 
   And the widows of Ashur are loud in their wail, 
And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal; 
And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword, 
Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord! 
Some folks will tell you the blues is a woman,
Some type of supernatural creature.
My mother would tell you, if she could,
About her life with my father,
A strange and sometimes cruel gentleman.
She would tell you about the choices
A young black woman faces.
Is falling in love with some man
A deal with the devil
In blue terms, the tongue we use
When we don't want nuance
To get in the way,
When we need to talk straight.
My mother chooses my father
After choosing a man
Who was, as we sing it,
Of no account.
This man made my father look good,
That's how bad it was.
He made my father seem like an island
In the middle of a stormy sea,
He made my father look like a rock.
And is the blues the moment you realize
You exist in a stacked deck,
You look in a mirror at your young face,
The face my sister carries,
And you know it's the only leverage
You've got.
Does this create a hurt that whispers
How you going to do?
Is the blues the moment
You shrug your shoulders
And agree, a girl without money
Is nothing, dust
To be pushed around by any old breeze.
Compared to this,
My father seems, briefly,
To be a fire escape.
This is the way the blues works
Its sorry wonders,
Makes trouble look like
A feather bed,
Makes the wrong man's kisses
A healing. 
Timing’s everything. The vapor rises
high in the sky, tossing to and fro,
then freezes, suddenly, and crystalizes
into a perfect flake of miraculous snow.
For countless miles, drifting east above
the world, whirling about in a swirling free-
for-all, appearing aimless, just like love,
but sensing, seeking out, its destiny.
Falling to where the two young skaters stand,
hand in hand, then flips and dips and whips
itself about to ever-so-gently land,
a miracle, across her unkissed lips:
as he blocks the wind raging from the south,
leaning forward to kiss her lovely mouth. 
I am offering this poem to you,
since I have nothing else to give.
Keep it like a warm coat
when winter comes to cover you,
or like a pair of thick socks
the cold cannot bite through,
                         I love you,
I have nothing else to give you,
so it is a pot full of yellow corn
to warm your belly in winter,
it is a scarf for your head, to wear
over your hair, to tie up around your face,
Keep it, treasure this as you would
if you were lost, needing direction,
in the wilderness life becomes when mature;
and in the corner of your drawer,
tucked away like a cabin or hogan
in dense trees, come knocking,
and I will answer, give you directions,
and let you warm yourself by this fire,
rest by this fire, and make you feel safe
It’s all I have to give,
and all anyone needs to live,
and to go on living inside,
when the world outside
no longer cares if you live or die;
remember,
                         I love you. 
In the desert
I saw a creature, naked, bestial, 
Who, squatting upon the ground, 
Held his heart in his hands,
And ate of it.
I said, “Is it good, friend?”
“It is bitter—bitter,” he answered; 
“But I like it
“Because it is bitter,
“And because it is my heart.” 
The word itself: prim, retired, its artifact 
her portrait above the fireplace, on her face 
the boredom she abhorred, then perfected, 
her hands held upward—their emptiness 
a revision, cigarette and brandy snifter 
painted, intolerably, out, to leave her this 
lesser gesture: What next? or shrugged Whatever.
From the waist down she was never there. 
What I adore is not horses, with their modern
domestic life span of 25 years. What I adore
is a bug that lives only one day, especially if
it’s a terrible day, a day of train derailment or
chemical lake or cop admits to cover-up, a day
when no one thinks of anything else, least of all
that bug. I know how it feels, born as I’ve been
into these rotting times, as into sin. Everybody’s
busy, so distraught they forget to kill me,
and even that won’t keep me alive. I share
my home not with horses, but with a little dog
who sees poorly at dusk and menaces stumps,
makes her muscle known to every statue.
I wish she could have a single day of   language,
so that I might reassure her don’t be afraid —
our whole world is dead and so can do you no harm. 
At last I can be with you!
The grinding hours
since I left your side!
The labor of being fully human,
working my opposable thumb,
talking, and walking upright.
Now I have unclasped
unzipped, stepped out of.
Husked, soft, a be-er only,
I do nothing, but point
my bare feet into your
clean smoothness
feel your quiet strength
the whole length of my body.
I close my eyes, hear myself
moan, so grateful to be held this way. 
Today is a trumpet to set the hounds baying.
The past is a fox the hunters are flaying.
Nothing unspoken goes without saying.
Love’s a casino where lovers risk playing.
The future’s a marker our hearts are prepaying.
The future’s a promise there’s no guaranteeing.
Today is a fire the field mice are fleeing.
Love is a marriage of feeling and being.
The past is a mirror for wishful sightseeing.
Nothing goes missing without absenteeing.
Nothing gets cloven except by dividing.
The future is chosen by atoms colliding.
The past’s an elision forever eliding.
Today is a fog bank in which I am hiding.
Love is a burn forever debriding.
Love’s an ascent forever plateauing.
Nothing is granted except by bestowing.
Today is an anthem the cuckoos are crowing.
The future’s a convolute river onflowing.
The past is a lawn the neighbor is mowing.
The past is an answer not worth pursuing,
Nothing gets done except by the doing.
The future’s a climax forever ensuing.
Love is only won by wooing.
Today is a truce between reaping and rueing. 
“The Knights of the Joyous Venture”—Puck of Pook’s HillWhat is a woman that you forsake her, 
And the hearth-fire and the home-acre, 
To go with the old grey Widow-maker? 
She has no house to lay a guest in—
But one chill bed for all to rest in, 
That the pale suns and the stray bergs nest in. 
She has no strong white arms to fold you, 
But the ten-times-fingering weed to hold you—
Out on the rocks where the tide has rolled you. 
Yet, when the signs of summer thicken, 
And the ice breaks, and the birch-buds quicken, 
Yearly you turn from our side, and sicken— 
Sicken again for the shouts and the slaughters. 
You steal away to the lapping waters, 
And look at your ship in her winter-quarters. 
You forget our mirth, and talk at the tables, 
The kine in the shed and the horse in the stables— 
To pitch her sides and go over her cables. 
Then you drive out where the storm-clouds swallow, 
And the sound of your oar-blades, falling hollow, 
Is all we have left through the months to follow. 
Ah, what is Woman that you forsake her, 
To go with the old grey Widow-maker ? 
It was not Death, for I stood up, 
And all the Dead, lie down - 
It was not Night, for all the Bells 
Put out their TonguesTongues The clappers inside of the bells, for Noon. 
It was not Frost, for on my Flesh 
I felt SiroccosSiroccos Hot winds. The Emily Dickinson Lexicon includes definitions from the American Dictionary of the English Language (1844): “A pernicious wind that blows from the south-east in Italy, called the Syrian wind. It is said to resemble the steam from the mouth of an oven.” - crawl -
Nor Fire - for just my marble feet 
Could keep a Chancel,Chancel The section near the altar of a church cool - 
And yet, it tasted, like them all, 
The Figures I have seen 
Set orderly, for Burial 
Reminded me, of mine - 
As if my life were shaven,
And fitted to a frame,
And could not breathe without a key, 
And ’twas like Midnight, some -
When everything that ticked - has stopped -
And space stares - all around -
Or Grisly frosts - first Autumn morns,
Repeal the Beating Ground -
But most, like Chaos - Stopless - cool - 
Without a Chance, or sparspar The top mast of a ship  -
Or even a Report of Land -
To justify - Despair. 
Here is the grackle, people. 
Here is the fox, folks. 
The grackle sits in the bracken. The fox   
   hopes. 
Here are the fronds, friends, 
that cover the fox. 
The fronds get in a frenzy. The grackle   
   looks. 
Here are the ticks, tykes,   
that live in the leaves, loves.   
The fox is confounded, 
and God is above. 
Sometimes I say I’m going to meet my sister at the café— 
even though I have no sister—just because it’s such 
a beautiful thing to say. I’ve always thought so, ever since
I read a novel in which two sisters were constantly meeting 
in cafés. Today, for example, I walked alone 
on the wet sidewalk, wearing my rain boots, expecting
someone might ask where I was headed. I bought 
a steno pad and a watch battery, the store windows 
fogged up. Rain in April is a kind of promise, and it costs
nothing. I carried a bag of books to the café and ordered 
tea. I like a place that’s lit by lamps. I like a place 
where you can hear people talk about small things,
like the difference between azure and cerulean, 
and the price of tulips. It’s going down. I watched 
someone who could be my sister walk in, shaking the rain
from her hair. I thought, even now florists are filling 
their coolers with tulips, five dollars a bundle. All over 
the city there are sisters. Any one of them could be mine. 
Like the horn you played in Catholic school
the city will open its mouth and cry
out. Don't worry 'bout nothing. Don't mean
In the cards and at the bend in the road   
we never saw you   
in the womb and in the crossfire   
in the numbers   
whatever you had your hand in   
which was everything   
we were told never to put   
our faith in you   
to bow to you humbly after all   
because in the end there was nothing   
else we could do   
but not to believe in you   
still we might coax you with pebbles   
kept warm in the hand   
or coins or the relics   
of vanished animals   
observances rituals   
not binding upon you   
who make no promises   
we might do such things only   
not to neglect you   
and risk your disfavor   
oh you who are never the same   
who are secret as the day when it comes   
you whom we explain   
as often as we can   
without understanding 
Then it was always
for now, later
for later.
And then years of now
passed, and it grew later
and later. Trapped
in the shrinking
chocolate box
the confused sardine
was unhappy. It
leapt, and banged its head
again. And afterward
they said shall we
repeat the experiment.
And it said
later for that. 
You love your friend, so you fly across the country to see her.
Your friend is grieving. When you look at her, you see that something’s missing.
You look again. She seems all there: reading glasses, sarcasm, leather pumps.
What did you expect? Ruins? Demeter without arms in the British Museum?
Your friend says she believes there’s more pain than beauty in the world.
When Persephone was taken, Demeter damned the world for half the year.
The other half remained warm and bountiful; the Greeks loved symmetry.
On the plane, the man next to you read a geometry book, the lesson on finding the circumference of a circle.
On circumference: you can calculate the way around if you know the way across.
You try across with your friend. You try around.
I don’t believe in an afterlife, she says. But after K. died, I thought I might go after her.
Of all the people in the mornings at the mall,   
it’s the old liberators I like best,    
those veterans of the Bulge, Anzio, or Monte Cassino   
I see lost in Automotive or back in Home Repair,    
bored among the paints and power tools.   
Or the really old ones, the ones who are going fast,    
who keep dozing off in the little orchards   
of shade under the distant skylights.   
All around, from one bright rack to another,    
their wives stride big as generals,    
their handbags bulging like ripe fruit.   
They are almost all gone now,    
and with them they are taking the flak    
and fire storms, the names of the old bombing runs.   
Each day a little more of their memory goes out,   
darkens the way a house darkens,    
its rooms quietly filling with evening,   
until nothing but the wind lifts the lace curtains,   
the wind bearing through the empty rooms   
the rich far off scent of gardens   
where just now, this morning,   
light is falling on the wild philodendrons. 
I know what my heart is like 
      Since your love died: 
It is like a hollow ledge 
Holding a little pool 
      Left there by the tide, 
      A little tepid pool, 
Drying inward from the edge. 
I close my eyes like a good little boy at night in bed,   
as I was told to do by my mother when she lived, 
and before bed I brush my teeth and slip on my pajamas,   
as I was told, and look forward to tomorrow. 
I do all things required of me to make me a citizen of sterling worth.   
I keep a job and come home each evening for dinner. I arrive at the   
same time on the same train to give my family a sense of order. 
I obey traffic signals. I am cordial to strangers, I answer my   
mail promptly. I keep a balanced checking account. Why can’t I   
live forever? 
What torture lurks within a single thought   
When grown too constant; and however kind,   
However welcome still, the weary mind 
Aches with its presence. Dull remembrance taught   
Remembers on unceasingly; unsought   
The old delight is with us but to find   
That all recurring joy is pain refined,   
Become a habit, and we struggle, caught.   
You lie upon my heart as on a nest,   
Folded in peace, for you can never know   
How crushed I am with having you at rest   
Heavy upon my life. I love you so 
You bind my freedom from its rightful quest.   
In mercy lift your drooping wings and go. 
Without even leaving one’s door, One can know the whole world.—LaoziThe rumble of the night sounds 
even in the bright daylight 
of morning. Life blooms amid 
the Ten Thousand Things, but 
does not bloom amid the Ten 
Thousand Things. Shrivel-eyed 
I wake up and tend to the One 
here and now, clamoring to be 
let out. Down with the gate, 
out with the boy, to the rooms 
of life’s necessities, first 
to void and next to fill. 
The Order is only order which 
is disorder, the only Disorder 
is the disorder that is order. 
We usher ourselves, each in our 
own way, back down the way 
for various brushings, combings, 
other groomings. Each in our 
own way we urge the other 
toward some kind of growth: 
one to assume, the other   
to renounce; one to grow larger, 
the other to grow smaller, 
thereby growing larger. Words 
do not work, and when they do not, 
other words might. This makes 
more sense than it seems, works 
more often than it doesn’t, 
except when it really doesn’t, 
and then that disorder creeps 
back in. In five minutes, 
a different challenge. In five 
hours, a different One. Six 
more hours, the One is rubbing 
eyes, untangled like a dragon, 
shucked and undone like an oyster. 
The night slowly rolls abed 
and the words form stories form 
sleep, the sleep of the Ten 
Thousand Things, the sleep 
that will echo the next day 
in the night’s rumbling sounds, 
in the bright light of morning. 
Is there a solitary wretch who hies 
   To the tall cliff, with starting pace or slow, 
And, measuring, views with wild and hollow eyes 
   Its distance from the waves that chide below; 
Who, as the sea-born gale with frequent sighs 
   Chills his cold bed upon the mountain turf, 
With hoarse, half-uttered lamentation, lies 
   Murmuring responses to the dashing surf? 
In moody sadness, on the giddy brink, 
   I see him more with envy than with fear; 
He has no nice felicities that shrink 
   From giant horrors; wildly wandering here, 
He seems (uncursed with reason) not to know 
The depth or the duration of his woe. 
Ah! why, because the dazzling sun
Restored my earth to joy
Have you departed, every one,
And left a desert sky?
All through the night, your glorious eyes
Were gazing down in mine,
And with a full heart's thankful sighs
I blessed that watch divine!
I was at peace, and drank your beams
As they were life to me
And revelled in my changeful dreams
Like petrel on the sea.
Thought followed thought—star followed star
Through boundless regions on,
While one sweet influence, near and far,
Thrilled through and proved us one.
Why did the morning rise to break
So great, so pure a spell,
And scorch with fire the tranquil cheek
Where your cool radiance fell?
Blood-red he rose, and arrow-straight,
His fierce beams struck my brow;
The soul of Nature sprang elate,
But mine sank sad and low!
My lids closed down—yet through their veil
I saw him blazing still;
And bathe in gold the misty dale,
And flash upon the hill.
I turned me to the pillow then
To call back Night, and see
Your worlds of solemn light, again
Throb with my heart and me!
It would not do—the pillow glowed
And glowed both roof and floor,
And birds sang loudly in the wood,
And fresh winds shook the door.
The curtains waved, the wakened flies
Were murmuring round my room,
Imprisoned there, till I should rise
And give them leave to roam.
O Stars and Dreams and Gentle Night;
O Night and Stars return!
And hide me from the hostile light
That does not warm, but burn—
That drains the blood of suffering men;
Drinks tears, instead of dew:
Let me sleep through his blinding reign,
And only wake with you!
So, we'll go no more a roving 
   So late into the night, 
Though the heart be still as loving, 
   And the moon be still as bright. 
For the sword outwears its sheath, 
   And the soul wears out the breast, 
And the heart must pause to breathe, 
   And love itself have rest. 
Though the night was made for loving, 
   And the day returns too soon, 
Yet we'll go no more a roving 
   By the light of the moon. 
The mask that burns like a violin, the mask
 that sings only dead languages, that loves
 the destruction of being put on. The mask
 that sighs like a woman even though
 a woman wears it. The mask beaded with
 freshwater pearls, with seeds. The plumed mask,
 the mask with a sutured mouth, a moonface,
 with a healed gash that means harvest. A glower
 that hides wanting. A grotesque pucker. Here’s
 a beaked mask, a braided mask, here’s a mask
 without eyes, a mask that looks like a mask
 but isn’t—please don’t try to unribbon it.
 The mask that snows coins, the mask full of wasps.
 Lace mask to net escaping thoughts. Pass me
 the rouged mask, the one made of sheet music.
 Or the jackal mask, the hide-bound mask
 that renders lovers identical with night. 
Stand in a field long enough, and the sounds   
start up again. The crickets, the invisible   
toad who claims that change is possible,
And all the other life too small to name.   
First one, then another, until innumerable 
they merge into the single voice of a summer hill.
Yes, it’s hard to stand still, hour after hour,   
fixed as a fencepost, hearing the steers 
snort in the dark pasture, smelling the manure. 
And paralyzed by the mystery of how a stone   
can bear to be a stone, the pain 
the grass endures breaking through the earth’s crust. 
Unimaginable the redwoods on the far hill,   
rooted for centuries, the living wood grown tall 
and thickened with a hundred thousand days of light. 
The old windmill creaks in perfect time 
to the wind shaking the miles of pasture grass,   
and the last farmhouse light goes off. 
Something moves nearby. Coyotes hunt   
these hills and packs of feral dogs. 
But standing here at night accepts all that. 
You are your own pale shadow in the quarter moon,   
moving more slowly than the crippled stars,   
part of the moonlight as the moonlight falls, 
Part of the grass that answers the wind, 
part of the midnight’s watchfulness that knows   
there is no silence but when danger comes. 
Methought I saw my late espoused saint 
       Brought to me, like Alcestis, from the grave, 
       Whom Jove's great son to her glad husband gave, 
       Rescu'd from death by force, though pale and faint. 
Mine, as whom wash'd from spot of child-bed taint 
       Purification in the old Law did save, 
       And such as yet once more I trust to have 
       Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint, 
Came vested all in white, pure as her mind; 
       Her face was veil'd, yet to my fancied sight 
       Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shin'd 
So clear as in no face with more delight. 
       But Oh! as to embrace me she inclin'd, 
       I wak'd, she fled, and day brought back my night. 
We have walked in Love's land a little way,
 We have learnt his lesson a little while,
 And shall we not part at the end of day,
 With a sigh, a smile?
A little while in the shine of the sun,
 We were twined together, joined lips, forgot
 How the shadows fall when the day is done,
 And when Love is not.
We have made no vows--there will none be broke,
 Our love was free as the wind on the hill,
 There was no word said we need wish unspoke,
 We have wrought no ill.
So shall we not part at the end of day,
 Who have loved and lingered a little while,
 Join lips for the last time, go our way,
The whiskey on your breath   
Could make a small boy dizzy;   
But I hung on like death:   
Such waltzing was not easy. 
We romped until the pans   
Slid from the kitchen shelf;   
My mother’s countenance   
Could not unfrown itself. 
The hand that held my wrist   
Was battered on one knuckle;   
At every step you missed 
My right ear scraped a buckle. 
You beat time on my head   
With a palm caked hard by dirt,   
Then waltzed me off to bed   
Still clinging to your shirt. 
   I am the Smoke King 
   I am black!
I am swinging in the sky,
I am wringing worlds awry;
I am the thought of the throbbing mills,
I am the soul of the soul-toil kills,
Wraith of the ripple of trading rills;
Up I’m curling from the sod, 
I am whirling home to God;
   I am the Smoke King
   I am black.
   I am the Smoke King, 
I am wreathing broken hearts,
I am sheathing love’s light darts;
   Inspiration of iron times 
   Wedding the toil of toiling climes,
   Shedding the blood of bloodless crimes—
Lurid lowering ’mid the blue, 
Torrid towering toward the true,
   I am the Smoke King,
I am darkening with song,
I am hearkening to wrong!
   I will be black as blackness can—
   The blacker the mantle, the mightier the man! 
   For blackness was ancient ere whiteness began. 
I am daubing God in night,
I am swabbing Hell in white:
I am cursing ruddy morn,
I am hearsing hearts unborn:
   Souls unto me are as stars in a night,
   I whiten my black men—I blacken my white! 
   What’s the hue of a hide to a man in his might? 
Hail! great, gritty, grimy hands—
Sweet Christ, pity toiling lands!
   I am black. 
This dry night, nothing unusual   
About the clip, clop, casual 
Iron of his shoes as he stamps death 
Like a mint on the innocent coinage of earth. 
I lift the window, watch the ambling feather 
Of hock and fetlock, loosed from its daily tether 
In the tinker camp on the Enniskerry Road,   
Pass, his breath hissing, his snuffling head 
Down. He is gone. No great harm is done.   
Only a leaf of our laurel hedge is torn— 
Of distant interest like a maimed limb,   
Only a rose which now will never climb 
The stone of our house, expendable, a mere   
Line of defence against him, a volunteer 
You might say, only a crocus, its bulbous head   
Blown from growth, one of the screamless dead. 
But we, we are safe, our unformed fear 
Of fierce commitment gone; why should we care 
If a rose, a hedge, a crocus are uprooted   
Like corpses, remote, crushed, mutilated? 
He stumbles on like a rumour of war, huge   
Threatening. Neighbours use the subterfuge 
Of curtains. He stumbles down our short street   
Thankfully passing us. I pause, wait, 
Then to breathe relief lean on the sill   
And for a second only my blood is still 
With atavism. That rose he smashed frays   
Ribboned across our hedge, recalling days 
Of burned countryside, illicit braid: 
A cause ruined before, a world betrayed. 
Now that the winter's gone, the earth hath lost 
Her snow-white robes, and now no more the frost 
Candies the grass, or casts an icy cream 
Upon the silver lake or crystal stream; 
But the warm sun thaws the benumbed earth, 
And makes it tender; gives a sacred birth 
To the dead swallow; wakes in hollow tree 
The drowsy cuckoo, and the humble-bee. 
Now do a choir of chirping minstrels bring 
In triumph to the world the youthful Spring. 
The valleys, hills, and woods in rich array 
Welcome the coming of the long'd-for May. 
Now all things smile, only my love doth lour; 
Nor hath the scalding noonday sun the power 
To melt that marble ice, which still doth hold 
Her heart congeal'd, and makes her pity cold. 
The ox, which lately did for shelter fly 
Into the stall, doth now securely lie 
In open fields; and love no more is made 
By the fireside, but in the cooler shade 
Amyntas now doth with his Chloris sleep 
Under a sycamore, and all things keep 
Time with the season; only she doth carry 
June in her eyes, in her heart January. 
The dove-white gulls 
on the wet lawn in Washington Square   
in the early morning fog 
each a little ghost in the gloaming 
Souls transmigrated maybe 
from Hudson’s shrouded shores 
across all the silent years— 
Which one’s my maybe mafioso father   
in his so white suit and black shoes 
in his real estate office Forty-second Street   
or at the front table wherever he went— 
Which my dear lost mother with faded smile   
locked away from me in time— 
Which my big brother Charley 
selling switching-signals all his life 
on the New York Central— 
And which good guy brother Clem 
sweating in Sing Sing’s darkest offices   
deputy-warden thirty years 
watching executions in the wooden armchair   
(with leather straps and black hood) 
He too gone mad with it in the end— 
And which my nearest brother Harry 
still kindest and dearest in a far suburb— 
I see them now all turn to me at last   
gull-eyed in the white dawn 
about to call to me 
across the silent grass 
A noiseless patient spider, 
I mark’d where on a little promontory it stood isolated, 
Mark’d how to explore the vacant vast surrounding, 
It launch’d forth filament, filament, filament, out of itself, 
Ever unreeling them, ever tirelessly speeding them. 
And you O my soul where you stand, 
Surrounded, detached, in measureless oceans of space, 
Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing, seeking the spheres to connect them, 
Till the bridge you will need be form’d, till the ductile anchor hold, 
Till the gossamer thread you fling catch somewhere, O my soul. 
Like Crusoe with the bootless gold we stand 
Upon the desert verge of death, and say: 
“What shall avail the woes of yesterday 
To buy to-morrow’s wisdom, in the land 
Whose currency is strange unto our hand? 
In life’s small market they had served to pay 
Some late-found rapture, could we but delay 
Till Time hath matched our means to our demand.” 
But otherwise Fate wills it, for, behold, 
Our gathered strength of individual pain, 
When Time’s long alchemy hath made it gold, 
Dies with us—hoarded all these years in vain, 
Since those that might be heir to it the mould 
Renew, and coin themselves new griefs again. 
                                    II 
O Death, we come full-handed to thy gate, 
Rich with strange burden of the mingled years, 
Gains and renunciations, mirth and tears, 
And love’s oblivion, and remembering hate, 
Nor know we what compulsion laid such freight 
Upon our souls—and shall our hopes and fears 
Buy nothing of thee, Death? Behold our wares, 
And sell us the one joy for which we wait. 
Had we lived longer, like had such for sale, 
With the last coin of sorrow purchased cheap, 
But now we stand before thy shadowy pale, 
And all our longings lie within thy keep— 
Death, can it be the years shall naught avail? 
“Not so,” Death answered, “they shall purchase sleep.” 
How many times these low feet staggered -
Only the soldered mouth can tell -
Try - can you stir the awful rivet - 
Try - can you lift the hasps of steel! 
Stroke the cool forehead - hot so often - 
Lift - if you care - the listless hair - 
Handle the adamantine fingers 
Never a thimble - more - shall wear - 
Buzz the dull flies - on the chamber window - 
Brave - shines the sun through the freckled pane - 
Fearless - the cobweb swings from the ceiling - 
Indolent Housewife - in Daisies - lain! 
We were dancing—it must have 
 been a foxtrot or a waltz,
 something romantic but
 requiring restraint,
 rise and fall, precise
 execution as we moved 
 into the next song without
 stopping, two chests heaving
 above a seven-league
 stride—such perfect agony,
 one learns to smile through,
 ecstatic mimicry
 being the sine qua non
 of American Smooth.
 And because I was distracted
 by the effort of 
 keeping my frame
 (the leftward lean, head turned
 just enough to gaze out
 past your ear and always
 smiling, smiling),
 I didn’t notice
 how still you’d become until
 we had done it
 (for two measures?
 four?)—achieved flight,
 that swift and serene
 magnificence,
 before the earth
 remembered who we were
 and brought us down. ﻿ 
Virgin, sappy, gorgeous, the right-now   
Flutters its huge prosthetics at us, flung 
To the spotlights, frozen in motion, center-ice. 
And the first rows, shaken with an afterslice 
That’s bowled them into their seats like a big wet ciao.   
O daffy panoply O rare device 
O flashing leg-iron at a whopping price   
Whipping us into ecstasies and how, 
The whole galumphing Garden swung and swung, 
A rescue helicopter’s bottom rung   
Glinting and spinning off, a scud of fluff,   
A slash of petals up against the bough, 
A juggler’s avalanche of silken stuff   
Gushing in white-hot verticals among   
Camels and axels and pyramids, oh wow, 
Bewilderment is parachute enough. 
We jolt. A sidewise stutterstep in chorus.   
The other billboards flicker by before us. 
Gone! with a budded petulance that stung.   
So talented! So targeted! So young!   
Such concentration on the bottom line! 
We vanish down the IRT. A shine. 
A glimmer. Something. Nothing. To think twice   
Was to have lost the trick of paradise. 
The sleep of this night deepens 
because I have walked coatless from the house 
carrying the white envelope. 
All night it will say one name 
in its little tin house by the roadside. 
I have raised the metal flag 
so its shadow under the roadlamp 
leaves an imprint on the rain-heavy bushes. 
Now I will walk back 
thinking of the few lights still on 
in the town a mile away. 
In the yellowed light of a kitchen 
the millworker has finished his coffee, 
his wife has laid out the white slices of bread 
on the counter. Now while the bed they have left 
is still warm, I will think of you, you 
who are so far away 
you have caused me to look up at the stars. 
Tonight they have not moved 
from childhood, those games played after dark. 
Again I walk into the wet grass 
toward the starry voices. Again, I 
am the found one, intimate, returned 
by all I touch on the way. 
Two guitars were left in a room all alone 
They sat on different corners of the parlor 
In this solitude they started talking to each other 
My strings are tight and full of tears 
The man who plays me has no heart 
I have seen it leave out of his mouth 
I have seen it melt out of his eyes 
It dives into the pores of the earth 
When they squeeze me tight I bring 
Down the angels who live off the chorus 
The trios singing loosen organs 
With melodious screwdrivers 
Sentiment comes off the hinges 
Because a song is a mountain put into 
Words and landscape is the feeling that 
Enters something so big in the harmony 
We are always in danger of blowing up 
With passion 
The other guitar: 
In 1944 New York 
When the Trio Los Panchos started 
With Mexican & Puerto Rican birds 
I am the one that one of them held 
Tight    like a woman 
Their throats gardenia gardens 
An airport for dreams 
I've been in theaters and cabarets 
I played in an apartment on 102nd street 
After a baptism pregnant with women 
The men flirted and were offered 
Chicken soup 
Echoes came out of hallways as if from caves 
Someone is opening the door now 
The two guitars hushed and there was a 
Resonance in the air like what is left by 
The last chord of a bolero. 
A siren sang, and Europe turned away 
From the high castle and the shepherd’s crook.   
Three caravels went sailing to Cathay 
On the strange ocean, and the captains shook   
Their banners out across the Mexique Bay. 
And in our early days we did the same.   
Remembering our fathers in their wreck 
We crossed the sea from Palos where they came   
And saw, enormous to the little deck,   
A shore in silence waiting for a name. 
The treasures of Cathay were never found.   
In this America, this wilderness 
Where the axe echoes with a lonely sound,   
The generations labor to possess 
And grave by grave we civilize the ground. 
Curtains forcing their will   
against the wind, 
children sleep, 
exchanging dreams with   
seraphim. The city 
drags itself awake on   
subway straps; and 
I, an alarm, awake as a   
rumor of war, 
lie stretching into dawn,   
unasked and unheeded. 
When I consider how my light is spent, 
   Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide, 
   And that one Talent which is death to hide 
   Lodged with me useless, though my Soul more bent 
To serve therewith my Maker, and present 
   My true account, lest he returning chide; 
   “Doth God exact day-labour, light denied?” 
   I fondly ask. But patience, to prevent 
That murmur, soon replies, “God doth not need 
   Either man’s work or his own gifts; who best 
   Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state 
Is Kingly. Thousands at his bidding speed 
   And post o’er Land and Ocean without rest: 
   They also serve who only stand and wait.” 
Would I might rouse the Lincoln in you all, 
That which is gendered in the wilderness 
From lonely prairies and God’s tenderness. 
Imperial soul, star of a weedy stream, 
Born where the ghosts of buffaloes still dream, 
Whose spirit hoof-beats storm above his grave, 
Above that breast of earth and prairie-fire— 
Fire that freed the slave. 
Because I have come to the fence at night, 
the horses arrive also from their ancient stable. 
They let me stroke their long faces, and I note 
in the light of the now-merging moon
how they, a Morgan and a Quarter, have been 
by shake-guttered raindrops 
spotted around their rumps and thus made 
Appaloosas, the ancestral horses of this place.
Maybe because it is night, they are nervous, 
or maybe because they too sense 
what they have become, they seem 
to be waiting for me to say something
to whatever ancient spirits might still abide here, 
that they might awaken from this strange dream, 
in which there are fences and stables and a man 
who doesn’t know a single word they understand. 
I find no peace, and all my war is done. 
I fear and hope. I burn and freeze like ice. 
I fly above the wind, yet can I not arise; 
And nought I have, and all the world I season. 
That loseth nor locketh holdeth me in prison 
And holdeth me not—yet can I scape no wise— 
Nor letteth me live nor die at my device, 
And yet of death it giveth me occasion. 
Without eyen I see, and without tongue I plain. 
I desire to perish, and yet I ask health. 
I love another, and thus I hate myself. 
I feed me in sorrow and laugh in all my pain; 
Likewise displeaseth me both life and death, 
And my delight is causer of this strife. 
Out of the night that covers me, 
      Black as the pit from pole to pole, 
I thank whatever gods may be 
      For my unconquerable soul. 
In the fell clutch of circumstance 
      I have not winced nor cried aloud. 
Under the bludgeonings of chance 
      My head is bloody, but unbowed. 
Beyond this place of wrath and tears 
      Looms but the Horror of the shade, 
And yet the menace of the years 
      Finds and shall find me unafraid. 
It matters not how strait the gate, 
      How charged with punishments the scroll, 
I am the master of my fate, 
      I am the captain of my soul. 
This time I came to the starting place
with my best running shoes, and pure speed
held back for the finish, came with only love
of the clock and the underfooting
and the other runners. Each of us would 
be testing excellence and endurance
in the other, though in the past I’d often
veer off to follow some feral distraction
down a side path, allowing myself
to pursue something odd or beautiful,
becoming acquainted with a few of the ways
not to blame myself for failing to succeed.
I had come to believe what’s beautiful
had more to do with daring
to take yourself seriously, to stay
the course, whatever the course might be.
The person in front seemed ready to fade,
his long, graceful stride shortening
as I came up along his side. I was sure now
I’d at least exceed my best time.
But the man with the famous final kick
already had begun his move. Beautiful, I heard
a spectator say, as if something inevitable
about to come from nowhere was again on its way. 
Seven dog-days we let pass 
Naming Queens in Glenmacnass, 
All the rare and royal names 
Wormy sheepskin yet retains, 
Etain, Helen, Maeve, and Fand, 
Golden Deirdre's tender hand, 
Bert, the big-foot, sung by Villon, 
Cassandra, Ronsard found in Lyon. 
Queens of Sheba, Meath and Connaught, 
Coifed with crown, or gaudy bonnet, 
Queens whose finger once did stir men, 
Queens were eaten of fleas and vermin, 
Queens men drew like Monna Lisa, 
Or slew with drugs in Rome and Pisa, 
We named Lucrezia Crivelli, 
And Titian's lady with amber belly, 
Queens acquainted in learned sin, 
Jane of Jewry's slender shin: 
Queens who cut the bogs of Glanna, 
Judith of Scripture, and Gloriana, 
Queens who wasted the East by proxy, 
Or drove the ass-cart, a tinker's doxy, 
Yet these are rotten — I ask their pardon — 
And we've the sun on rock and garden, 
These are rotten, so you're the Queen 
Of all the living, or have been. 
A man and a woman are sitting at a table.
It is supper time. The air is green. The walls
Are white in the green air, as rocks under water
Retain their own true color, though washed in green.
I do not know either the man or the woman,
Nor do I know whatever they know of each other.
Though washed in my eye they keep their own true color.
The man is all his own hunched strength, the body’s
Self and strength, that bears, like weariness,
Itself upon itself, as a stone’s weight
Bears heavily on itself to be itself.
Heavy the strength that bears the body down.
And the way he feeds is like a dreamless sleep.
The dreaming of a stone is how he feeds.
The woman’s arms are plump, mottled a little
The flesh, like standing milk, and on one arm
A blue bruise, got in some household labor or other,
Flowering in the white. Her staring eye,
Like some bird’s cry called from some deepest wood,
Says nothing of what it is but what it is.
Such silence is the bird’s cry of the stone.
The grey sea and the long black land; 
And the yellow half-moon large and low; 
And the startled little waves that leap 
In fiery ringlets from their sleep, 
As I gain the cove with pushing prow, 
And quench its speed i' the slushy sand. 
Then a mile of warm sea-scented beach; 
Three fields to cross till a farm appears; 
A tap at the pane, the quick sharp scratch 
And blue spurt of a lighted match, 
And a voice less loud, thro' its joys and fears, 
Than the two hearts beating each to each! 
O my Luve is like a red, red rose 
   That’s newly sprung in June; 
O my Luve is like the melody 
   That’s sweetly played in tune. 
So fair art thou, my bonnie lass, 
   So deep in luve am I; 
And I will luve thee still, my dear, 
   Till a’ the seas gang dry. 
Till a’ the seas gang dry, my dear, 
   And the rocks melt wi’ the sun; 
I will love thee still, my dear, 
   While the sands o’ life shall run. 
And fare thee weel, my only luve! 
   And fare thee weel awhile! 
And I will come again, my luve, 
   Though it were ten thousand mile. 
Boll-weevil’s coming, and the winter’s cold, 
Made cotton-stalks look rusty, seasons old, 
And cotton, scarce as any southern snow, 
Was vanishing; the branch, so pinched and slow, 
Failed in its function as the autumn rake; 
Drouth fighting soil had caused the soil to take 
All water from the streams; dead birds were found 
In wells a hundred feet below the ground— 
Such was the season when the flower bloomed. 
Old folks were startled, and it soon assumed 
Significance. Superstition saw 
Something it had never seen before: 
Brown eyes that loved without a trace of fear, 
Beauty so sudden for that time of year. 
Shall earth no more inspire thee,
Thou lonely dreamer now?
Since passion may not fire thee
Shall Nature cease to bow?
Thy mind is ever moving
In regions dark to thee;
Recall its useless roving
Come back and dwell with me.
I know my mountain breezes
Enchant and soothe thee still
I know my sunshine pleases
Despite thy wayward will.
When day with evening blending
Sinks from the summer sky,
I’ve seen thy spirit bending
In fond idolatry.
I’ve watched thee every hour;
I know my mighty sway,
I know my magic power
To drive thy griefs away.
Few hearts to mortals given
On earth so wildly pine;
Yet none would ask a heaven
More like this earth than thine.
Then let my winds caress thee;
Thy comrade let me be
Since nought beside can bless thee,
Return and dwell with me. 
Whenever Richard Cory went down town, 
We people on the pavement looked at him: 
He was a gentleman from sole to crown, 
Clean favored, and imperially slim. 
And he was always quietly arrayed, 
And he was always human when he talked; 
But still he fluttered pulses when he said, 
"Good-morning," and he glittered when he walked. 
And he was rich—yes, richer than a king—
And admirably schooled in every grace: 
In fine, we thought that he was everything 
To make us wish that we were in his place. 
So on we worked, and waited for the light, 
And went without the meat, and cursed the bread; 
And Richard Cory, one calm summer night, 
Went home and put a bullet through his head. 
Lines Composed 21st February 1825All Nature seems at work. Slugs leave their lair— 
The bees are stirring—birds are on the wing— 
And Winter slumbering in the open air, 
Wears on his smiling face a dream of Spring! 
And I the while, the sole unbusy thing, 
Nor honey make, nor pair, nor build, nor sing. 
         Yet well I ken the banks where amaranths blow, 
Have traced the fount whence streams of nectar flow. 
Bloom, O ye amaranths! bloom for whom ye may, 
For me ye bloom not! Glide, rich streams, away! 
With lips unbrightened, wreathless brow, I stroll: 
And would you learn the spells that drowse my soul? 
Work without Hope draws nectar in a sieve, 
And Hope without an object cannot live. 
The tortures of lumbago consumed Aunt Madge, 
And Leah Vest, once resigned from schoolmarming, 
Could not be convinced to leave the house, 
And Mrs. Mary Hogan, after birthing her fifth son, 
Lay bedfast for the last fifty-two years of her life, 
Reporting shooting pains that would begin 
High in her back and shear downward to the feet, 
As though, she said, she had been glazed in lightning; 
And also, men, broken on bridges and mills, 
Shell-shocked veterans, religious alcoholics— 
Leldon Kilpatrick, Johnson Suggs, Whitey Carlyle: 
They came and sat there too, leafing through 
Yellowing Pageants and Progressive Farmers; 
And, one by one, all entered in and talked 
While the good doctor gargled a dark chaff 
In his pipe and took down symptoms, 
Annotating them on his hidden chart— 
Numbness, neuralgia, the knotted lymph, 
The clammy palms—and then he’d scratch 
His temple’s meaningful patch of white 
And scrawl out his unfailing barbiturate prescription 
To be filled by his pharmacist brother-in-law 
Until half the county had gathered as in a lap— 
The quantum ache, the mutiny in every house. 
How much pain, how many diseases 
Consigned to the mythological, the dropped 
Ovaries, the torn-up nerves, what women 
Said, what men wanted to believe? Part of it 
Laughable, I know. Still I want someone 
To see, now that they lie safe in graves 
Beyond the vacant stores, that someone 
Listened and, hearing the wrong at the heart, 
Named it something that sounded real, whatever 
They lived through and died of. I remember 
Mrs. Lyle who called it a thorn in the flesh, 
And Mr. Appleton, who had no roof in his mouth. 
I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear, 
Those of mechanics, each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong, 
The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam, 
The mason singing his as he makes ready for work, or leaves off work, 
The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat, the deckhand singing on the steamboat deck, 
The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench, the hatter singing as he stands, 
The wood-cutter’s song, the ploughboy’s on his way in the morning, or at noon intermission or at sundown, 
The delicious singing of the mother, or of the young wife at work, or of the girl sewing or washing, 
Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else, 
The day what belongs to the day—at night the party of young fellows, robust, friendly, 
Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs. 
For EardrumFirst hold the needle
     like a lover’s hand
Lower it slowly
      let it tongue
      the record’s ear
Then cultivate
      the sweet beats
      blooming in the valley
      of the groove
Laugh at folks
      that make requests
What chef would let
      the diners determine
Which entrees
      make up the menu?
Young boys
      think it’s about
      flashy flicks
      of the wrist
But it’s about filling the floor
      with the manic
      language of dance
About knowing the beat
      of every record
      like a mama knows
      her child’s cries
Nobody cares
      how fast you scratch
Cuz it ain’t about
      soothing any itch
It’s about how many hairstyles
     are still standing
At the end of the night. 
Sky’s gray sheet spreads icy rain.
Through the night we heard the branches cracking.
Now they bend with the bowed ache of apostrophes.
Backs to the window, sitting on the couch, we listen
as the radio announces the list of schools closed.
An hour earlier I inched my way along
the road, tires spinning toward the ditch.
Now I read aloud to a teenage daughter,
who tolerates my foolishness, my claim
that Lao Tzu traversed a more slippery world.
With two books open on my lap, one in my hand,
two on the floor, I’m surrounded by imperfect
translations: a gathering chaos; something
mysteriously formed; without beginning,
without end; formless and perfect.
She responds, Sure,
I knew that, so what? I persist:
that existed before the heavens and the earth;
before the universe was born. She’s ready to go
upstairs and listen to the radio. I ask,
What was her face before her parents were born?
she answers, Nothing. I ask again.
She says it again. Where are the angels,
nights on humble knees, the psalms of faith,
the saints of daylight? She walks out of the room.
I’m surrounded by thin books.
How pointless to go anywhere on this day,
or maybe any other, but then
the time comes when there is
no other way but to stand firm on ice.
Harmonious Powers with Nature work 
On sky, earth, river, lake, and sea: 
Sunshine and storm, whirlwind and breeze 
All in one duteous task agree. 
Once did I see a slip of earth, 
By throbbing waves long undermined, 
Loosed from its hold; — how no one knew 
But all might see it float, obedient to the wind. 
Might see it, from the mossy shore 
Dissevered float upon the Lake, 
Float, with its crest of trees adorned 
On which the warbling birds their pastime take. 
Food, shelter, safety there they find 
There berries ripen, flowerets bloom; 
There insects live their lives — and die: 
A peopled world it is; in size a tiny room. 
And thus through many seasons’ space 
This little Island may survive 
But Nature, though we mark her not, 
Will take away — may cease to give. 
Perchance when you are wandering forth 
Upon some vacant sunny day 
Without an object, hope, or fear, 
Thither your eyes may turn — the Isle is passed away. 
Buried beneath the glittering Lake! 
Its place no longer to be found, 
Yet the lost fragments shall remain, 
To fertilize some other ground. 
“Is my team ploughing, 
   That I was used to drive 
And hear the harness jingle 
   When I was man alive?” 
Ay, the horses trample, 
   The harness jingles now; 
No change though you lie under 
   The land you used to plough. 
“Is football playing 
   Along the river shore, 
With lads to chase the leather, 
   Now I stand up no more?” 
Ay the ball is flying, 
   The lads play heart and soul; 
The goal stands up, the keeper 
   Stands up to keep the goal. 
“Is my girl happy, 
   That I thought hard to leave, 
And has she tired of weeping 
   As she lies down at eve?” 
Ay, she lies down lightly, 
   She lies not down to weep: 
Your girl is well contented. 
   Be still, my lad, and sleep. 
“Is my friend hearty, 
   Now I am thin and pine, 
And has he found to sleep in 
   A better bed than mine?” 
Yes, lad, I lie easy, 
   I lie as lads would choose; 
I cheer a dead man’s sweetheart, 
   Never ask me whose. 
Thou ill-form’d offspring of my feeble brain, 
Who after birth didst by my side remain, 
Till snatched from thence by friends, less wise than true, 
Who thee abroad, expos’d to publick view, 
Made thee in raggs, halting to th’ press to trudge, 
Where errors were not lessened (all may judg). 
At thy return my blushing was not small, 
My rambling brat (in print) should mother call, 
I cast thee by as one unfit for light, 
Thy Visage was so irksome in my sight; 
Yet being mine own, at length affection would 
Thy blemishes amend, if so I could: 
I wash’d thy face, but more defects I saw, 
And rubbing off a spot, still made a flaw. 
I stretched thy joynts to make thee even feet, 
Yet still thou run’st more hobling then is meet; 
In better dress to trim thee was my mind, 
But nought save home-spun Cloth, i’ th’ house I find. 
In this array ’mongst Vulgars mayst thou roam. 
In Criticks hands, beware thou dost not come; 
And take thy way where yet thou art not known, 
If for thy Father askt, say, thou hadst none: 
And for thy Mother, she alas is poor, 
Which caus’d her thus to send thee out of door. 
Veritas sequitur ...In the small beauty of the forest 
The wild deer bedding down— 
That they are there! 
                              Their eyes 
Effortless, the soft lips 
Nuzzle and the alien small teeth 
Tear at the grass 
                              The roots of it 
Dangle from their mouths 
Scattering earth in the strange woods. 
They who are there. 
                              Their paths 
Nibbled thru the fields, the leaves that shade them 
Hang in the distances 
Of sun 
                              The small nouns 
Crying faith 
In this in which the wild deer   
Startle, and stare out. 
I wandered lonely as a cloud 
That floats on high o'er vales and hills, 
When all at once I saw a crowd, 
A host, of golden daffodils; 
Beside the lake, beneath the trees, 
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze. 
Continuous as the stars that shine 
And twinkle on the milky way, 
They stretched in never-ending line 
Along the margin of a bay: 
Ten thousand saw I at a glance, 
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance. 
The waves beside them danced; but they 
Out-did the sparkling waves in glee: 
A poet could not but be gay, 
In such a jocund company: 
I gazed—and gazed—but little thought 
What wealth the show to me had brought: 
For oft, when on my couch I lie 
In vacant or in pensive mood, 
They flash upon that inward eye 
Which is the bliss of solitude; 
And then my heart with pleasure fills, 
And dances with the daffodils. 
After Li PoWhile my hair was still cut straight across my forehead
I played about the front gate, pulling flowers.
You came by on bamboo stilts, playing horse,
You walked about my seat, playing with blue plums.   
And we went on living in the village of Chōkan:
Two small people, without dislike or suspicion.   
At fourteen I married My Lord you.
I never laughed, being bashful.
Lowering my head, I looked at the wall.
Called to, a thousand times, I never looked back.
At fifteen I stopped scowling, 
I desired my dust to be mingled with yours
Forever and forever, and forever.
Why should I climb the look out?
At sixteen you departed
You went into far Ku-tō-en, by the river of swirling eddies,
And you have been gone five months.
The monkeys make sorrowful noise overhead.
You dragged your feet when you went out.
By the gate now, the moss is grown, the different mosses,
Too deep to clear them away!
The leaves fall early this autumn, in wind.
The paired butterflies are already yellow with August
Over the grass in the West garden;
They hurt me. 
I grow older.
If you are coming down through the narrows of the river Kiang,
Please let me know beforehand,
And I will come out to meet you
                        As far as Chō-fū-Sa. 
Constantly risking absurdity 
                                             and death 
            whenever he performs 
                                        above the heads 
                                                            of his audience 
   the poet like an acrobat 
                                 climbs on rime 
                                          to a high wire of his own making 
and balancing on eyebeams 
                                     above a sea of faces 
             paces his way 
                               to the other side of day 
    performing entrechats 
                               and sleight-of-foot tricks 
 and other high theatrics 
                               and all without mistaking 
                     any thing 
                               for what it may not be 
       For he's the super realist 
                                     who must perforce perceive 
                   taut truth 
                                 before the taking of each stance or step 
 in his supposed advance 
                                  toward that still higher perch 
where Beauty stands and waits 
                                     with gravity 
                                                to start her death-defying leap 
      And he 
             a little charleychaplin man 
                                           who may or may not catch 
               her fair eternal form 
                                     spreadeagled in the empty air 
                  of existence 
A poem should be palpable and mute   
As a globed fruit, 
Dumb 
As old medallions to the thumb, 
Silent as the sleeve-worn stone 
Of casement ledges where the moss has grown— 
A poem should be wordless   
As the flight of birds. 
                         *               
A poem should be motionless in time   
As the moon climbs, 
Leaving, as the moon releases 
Twig by twig the night-entangled trees, 
Leaving, as the moon behind the winter leaves,   
Memory by memory the mind— 
As the moon climbs. 
A poem should be equal to: 
Not true. 
For all the history of grief 
An empty doorway and a maple leaf. 
For love 
The leaning grasses and two lights above the sea— 
A poem should not mean   
But be. 
From the kindness of my parents   
I suppose it was that I held   
that belief about suffering   
imagining that if only   
it could come to the attention   
of any person with normal   
feelings certainly anyone   
literate who might have gone   
to college they would comprehend   
pain when it went on before them   
and would do something about it   
whenever they saw it happen   
in the time of pain the present   
they would try to stop the bleeding   
for example with their own hands   
but it escapes their attention   
or there may be reasons for it   
the victims under the blankets   
the meat counters the maimed children   
the animals the animals   
staring from the end of the world 
Her e-mail inbox always overflows.   
Her outbox doesn’t get much use at all.   
She puts on hold the umpteen-billionth call   
As music oozes forth to placate those   
Who wait, then disconnect. Outside, wind blows,   
Scything pale leaves. She sees a sparrow fall   
Fluttering to a claw-catch on a wall.   
Will He be in today? God only knows.   
She hasn’t seen His face—He’s so aloof.   
She’s long resigned He’ll never know or love her   
But still can wish there were some call, some proof   
That He requires a greater service of her.   
Fingers of rain now drum upon the roof,   
Coming from somewhere, somewhere far above her.    
The spirit is too blunt an instrument 
to have made this baby. 
Nothing so unskilful as human passions 
could have managed the intricate 
exacting particulars: the tiny 
blind bones with their manipulating tendons, 
the knee and the knucklebones, the resilient 
fine meshings of ganglia and vertebrae, 
the chain of the difficult spine. 
Observe the distinct eyelashes and sharp crescent 
fingernails, the shell-like complexity 
of the ear, with its firm involutions 
concentric in miniature to minute 
ossicles. Imagine the 
infinitesimal capillaries, the flawless connections 
of the lungs, the invisible neural filaments 
through which the completed body 
already answers to the brain. 
Then name any passion or sentiment 
possessed of the simplest accuracy. 
No, no desire or affection could have done 
with practice what habit 
has done perfectly, indifferently, 
through the body's ignorant precision. 
It is left to the vagaries of the mind to invent 
love and despair and anxiety 
and their pain. 
For some semitropical reason   
when the rains fall   
relentlessly they fall 
into swimming pools, these otherwise   
bright and scary 
arachnids. They can swim 
a little, but not for long 
and they can’t climb the ladder out. 
They usually drown—but   
if you want their favor, 
if you believe there is justice,   
a reward for not loving 
the death of ugly 
and even dangerous (the eel, hog snake,   
rats) creatures, if 
you believe these things, then   
you would leave a lifebuoy 
or two in your swimming pool at night. 
And in the morning   
you would haul ashore 
the huddled, hairy survivors 
and escort them 
back to the bush, and know, 
be assured that at least these saved,   
as individuals, would not turn up 
again someday 
in your hat, drawer, 
or the tangled underworld 
of your socks, and that even— 
when your belief in justice 
merges with your belief in dreams— 
they may tell the others 
in a sign language   
four times as subtle 
and complicated as man’s 
that you are good,   
that you love them, 
that you would save them again. 
We were very tired, we were very merry—
We had gone back and forth all night on the ferry.
It was bare and bright, and smelled like a stable—
But we looked into a fire, we leaned across a table,
We lay on a hill-top underneath the moon;
And the whistles kept blowing, and the dawn came soon. 
We had gone back and forth all night on the ferry; 
And you ate an apple, and I ate a pear, 
From a dozen of each we had bought somewhere; 
And the sky went wan, and the wind came cold, 
And the sun rose dripping, a bucketful of gold. 
We were very tired, we were very merry,
We hailed, “Good morrow, mother!” to a shawl-covered head, 
And bought a morning paper, which neither of us read;
And she wept, “God bless you!” for the apples and pears,
And we gave her all our money but our subway fares. 
Or Oreo, or 
worse. Or ordinary. 
Or your choice   
of category 
            or   
            Color 
or any color   
other than Colored 
or Colored Only. 
Or “Of Color” 
          
            Other 
or theory or discourse 
or oral territory. 
Oregon or Georgia 
or Florida Zora 
            or 
            Opportunity 
or born poor   
or Corporate. Or Moor. 
Or a Noir Orpheus 
or Senghor 
            Diaspora 
or a horrendous   
and tore-up journey. 
Or performance. Or allegory’s armor 
of ignorant comfort 
            Worship 
or reform or a sore chorus. 
Or Electoral Corruption 
or important ports 
of Yoruba or worry 
            Neighbor 
or fear of . . .
of terror or border. 
Or all organized 
minorities. 
A famous battle happened in this valley.   
                     You never understood the nature poem.   
Till now. Till this moment—if these statements   
                     seem separate, unrelated, follow this   
silence to its edge and you will hear   
                     the history of air: the crispness of a fern   
or the upward cut and turn around of   
                     a fieldfare or thrush written on it.   
The other history is silent: The estuary   
                     is over there. The issue was decided here:   
Two kings prepared to give no quarter.   
                     Then one king and one dead tradition.   
Now the humid dusk, the old wounds   
                     wait for language, for a different truth:   
When you see the silk of the willow   
                     and the wider edge of the river turn   
and grow dark and then darker, then   
                     you will know that the nature poem   
is not the action nor its end: it is   
                     this rust on the gate beside the trees, on 
the cattle grid underneath our feet,   
                     on the steering wheel shaft: it is   
an aftermath, an overlay and even in   
                     its own modest way, an art of peace: 
I try the word distance and it fills with   
                     sycamores, a summer's worth of pollen   
And as I write valley straw, metal   
                     blood, oaths, armour are unwritten.   
Silence spreads slowly from these words   
                     to those ilex trees half in, half out   
of shadows falling on the shallow ford   
                     of the south bank beside Yellow Island   
as twilight shows how this sweet corrosion   
                     begins to be complete: what we see   
is what the poem says:   
                     evening coming—cattle, cattle-shadows— 
and whin bushes and a change of weather   
                     about to change them all: what we see is how 
the place and the torment of the place are   
                     for this moment free of one another. 
Downhill I came, hungry, and yet not starved; 
Cold, yet had heat within me that was proof 
Against the North wind; tired, yet so that rest 
Had seemed the sweetest thing under a roof. 
Then at the inn I had food, fire, and rest, 
Knowing how hungry, cold, and tired was I. 
All of the night was quite barred out except 
An owl’s cry, a most melancholy cry 
Shaken out long and clear upon the hill, 
No merry note, nor cause of merriment, 
But one telling me plain what I escaped 
And others could not, that night, as in I went. 
And salted was my food, and my repose, 
Salted and sobered, too, by the bird’s voice 
Speaking for all who lay under the stars, 
Soldiers and poor, unable to rejoice. 
Come, my Celia, let us prove, 
While we can, the sports of love; 
Time will not be ours forever; 
He at length our good will sever. 
Spend not then his gifts in vain. 
Suns that set may rise again; 
But if once we lose this light, 
’Tis with us perpetual night. 
Why should we defer our joys? 
Fame and rumor are but toys. 
Cannot we delude the eyes 
Of a few poor household spies, 
Or his easier ears beguile, 
So removèd by our wile? 
’Tis no sin love’s fruit to steal; 
But the sweet thefts to reveal, 
To be taken, to be seen, 
These have crimes accounted been. 
Women have no wilderness in them,   
They are provident instead,   
Content in the tight hot cell of their hearts   
To eat dusty bread.   
They do not see cattle cropping red winter grass,   
They do not hear   
Snow water going down under culverts   
Shallow and clear.   
They wait, when they should turn to journeys,   
They stiffen, when they should bend.   
They use against themselves that benevolence   
To which no man is friend.   
They cannot think of so many crops to a field   
Or of clean wood cleft by an axe.   
Their love is an eager meaninglessness   
Too tense, or too lax.   
They hear in every whisper that speaks to them   
A shout and a cry.   
As like as not, when they take life over their door-sills   
They should let it go by. 
There’s been a Death, in the Opposite House,
As lately as Today —
I know it, by the numb look
Such Houses have — alway —
The Neighbors rustle in and out —
The Doctor — drives away —
A Window opens like a Pod —
Abrupt — mechanically —
Somebody flings a Mattress out —
The Children hurry by —
They wonder if it died — on that —
I used to — when a Boy —
The Minister — goes stiffly in —
As if the House were His —
And He owned all the Mourners — now —
And little Boys — besides —
And then the Milliner — and the Man
Of the Appalling Trade —
To take the measure of the House —
There’ll be that Dark Parade —
Of Tassels — and of Coaches — soon —
It’s easy as a Sign —
The Intuition of the News —
In just a Country Town —
Back when I used to be Indian
I am standing outside the
pool hall with my sister.
She strawberry blonde. Stale sweat
and beer through the
open door. A warrior leans on his stick,
fingers blue with chalk.
Another bends to shoot.
His braids brush the green
felt, swinging to the beat
of the jukebox. We move away.
Hank Williams falls again
in the backseat of a Cadillac.
I look back.
A wind off the distant hills lifts my shirt,
brings the scent
of wounded horses.
The Goddess who created this passing world 
Said Let there be lightbulbs & liquefaction 
Life spilled out onto the street, colors whirled 
Cars & the variously shod feet were born 
And the past & future & I born too   
Light as airmail paper away she flew   
To Annapurna or Mt. McKinley   
Or both but instantly 
Clarified, composed, forever was I   
Meant by her to recognize a painting   
As beautiful or a movie stunning   
And to adore the finitude of words   
And understand as surfaces my dreams   
Know the eye the organ of affection   
And depths to be inflections   
Of her voice & wrist & smile 
Now that I have your face by heart, I look   
Less at its features than its darkening frame   
Where quince and melon, yellow as young flame,   
Lie with quilled dahlias and the shepherd’s crook.   
Beyond, a garden. There, in insolent ease 
The lead and marble figures watch the show   
Of yet another summer loath to go 
Although the scythes hang in the apple trees. 
Now that I have your face by heart, I look. 
Now that I have your voice by heart, I read   
In the black chords upon a dulling page   
Music that is not meant for music’s cage, 
Whose emblems mix with words that shake and bleed.   
The staves are shuttled over with a stark   
Unprinted silence. In a double dream   
I must spell out the storm, the running stream.   
The beat’s too swift. The notes shift in the dark. 
Now that I have your voice by heart, I read. 
Now that I have your heart by heart, I see 
The wharves with their great ships and architraves;   
The rigging and the cargo and the slaves 
On a strange beach under a broken sky. 
O not departure, but a voyage done! 
The bales stand on the stone; the anchor weeps 
Its red rust downward, and the long vine creeps   
Beside the salt herb, in the lengthening sun. 
Now that I have your heart by heart, I see. 
That the dead are real to us
Cannot be denied, 
That the living are more real
When they are dead
Terrifies, that the dead can rise
As the living do is possible
Is possible to surmise, 
But all the stars cannot come near
All we meet in an eye.
Flee from me, fear, as soot
Flies in a breeze, do not burn 
Or settle in my sight, 
I’ve tasted you long enough,
Let me savor
Something otherwise.
Who wakes beside me now
Suits my soul, so I turn to words
Only to say he changes
Into his robe, rustles a page,
He raises the lid of the piano
To release what’s born in its cage.
If   words come back 
To say they compromise 
Or swear again they have died,
There’s no news in that, I reply,
But a music without notes
These notes comprise, still
As spring beneath us lies, 
Already something otherwise. 
... a separation from the world, a penetration to some source of power and a life-enhancing return ...               Van Gennep: Rites de Passage 
Moth-force a small town always has,   
          Given the night. 
                                                What field-forms can be, 
         Outlying the small civic light-decisions over 
               A man walking near home? 
                                                                         Men are not where he is   
      Exactly now, but they are around him    around him like the strength 
Of fields.    The solar system floats on 
    Above him in town-moths. 
                                                         Tell me, train-sound, 
    With all your long-lost grief, 
                                                         what I can give.   
    Dear Lord of all the fields 
                                                         what am I going to do? 
                                        Street-lights, blue-force and frail 
As the homes of men, tell me how to do it    how 
    To withdraw    how to penetrate and find the source   
      Of the power you always had 
                                                            light as a moth, and rising 
       With the level and moonlit expansion 
    Of the fields around, and the sleep of hoping men. 
       You?    I?    What difference is there?    We can all be saved 
       By a secret blooming. Now as I walk 
The night    and you walk with me    we know simplicity   
   Is close to the source that sleeping men 
       Search for in their home-deep beds. 
       We know that the sun is away    we know that the sun can be conquered   
   By moths, in blue home-town air. 
          The stars splinter, pointed and wild. The dead lie under 
The pastures.    They look on and help.    Tell me, freight-train, 
                            When there is no one else 
   To hear. Tell me in a voice the sea 
         Would have, if it had not a better one: as it lifts, 
          Hundreds of miles away, its fumbling, deep-structured roar 
               Like the profound, unstoppable craving 
            Of nations for their wish. 
                                                                    Hunger, time and the moon: 
         The moon lying on the brain 
                                                                    as on the excited sea    as on 
          The strength of fields. Lord, let me shake   
         With purpose.    Wild hope can always spring   
         From tended strength.    Everything is in that. 
            That and nothing but kindness.    More kindness, dear Lord 
Of the renewing green.    That is where it all has to start: 
         With the simplest things. More kindness will do nothing less 
             Than save every sleeping one 
             And night-walking one 
         Of us. 
                         My life belongs to the world. I will do what I can. 
In October of the year, 
he counts potatoes dug from the brown field,   
counting the seed, counting   
the cellar’s portion out,   
and bags the rest on the cart’s floor. 
He packs wool sheared in April, honey 
in combs, linen, leather   
tanned from deerhide,   
and vinegar in a barrel 
hooped by hand at the forge’s fire. 
He walks by his ox’s head, ten days 
to Portsmouth Market, and sells potatoes,   
and the bag that carried potatoes, 
flaxseed, birch brooms, maple sugar, goose   
feathers, yarn. 
When the cart is empty he sells the cart.   
When the cart is sold he sells the ox,   
harness and yoke, and walks 
home, his pockets heavy 
with the year’s coin for salt and taxes, 
and at home by fire’s light in November cold   
stitches new harness 
for next year’s ox in the barn, 
and carves the yoke, and saws planks   
building the cart again. 
Softly, in the dusk, a woman is singing to me; 
Taking me back down the vista of years, till I see 
A child sitting under the piano, in the boom of the tingling strings 
And pressing the small, poised feet of a mother who smiles as she sings. 
In spite of myself, the insidious mastery of song 
Betrays me back, till the heart of me weeps to belong 
To the old Sunday evenings at home, with winter outside 
And hymns in the cosy parlour, the tinkling piano our guide. 
So now it is vain for the singer to burst into clamour 
With the great black piano appassionato. The glamour 
Of childish days is upon me, my manhood is cast 
Down in the flood of remembrance, I weep like a child for the past. 
A narrow fellow in the grass 
Occasionally rides; 
You may have met him—did you not 
His notice sudden is, 
 The grass divides as with a comb, 
A spotted shaft is seen, 
And then it closes at your feet, 
And opens further on.
He likes a boggy acre,   
A floor too cool for corn,
But when a boy and barefoot, 
I more than once at noon 
Have passed, I thought, a whip lash, 
Unbraiding in the sun, 
When stooping to secure it, 
It wrinkled and was gone. 
Several of nature’s people 
I know, and they know me;
I feel for them a transport 
Of cordiality. 
 But never met this fellow, 
Attended or alone, 
Without a tighter breathing, 
And zero at the bone. 
Have but one God: thy knees were sore 
If bent in prayer to three or four. 
Adore no images save those 
The coinage of thy country shows. 
Take not the Name in vain. Direct 
Thy swearing unto some effect. 
Thy hand from Sunday work be held— 
Work not at all unless compelled. 
Honor thy parents, and perchance 
Their wills thy fortunes may advance. 
Kill not—death liberates thy foe 
From persecution’s constant woe. 
Kiss not thy neighbor’s wife. Of course 
There’s no objection to divorce. 
To steal were folly, for ’tis plain 
In cheating there is greater gain. 
Bear not false witness. Shake your head 
And say that you have “heard it said.” 
Who stays to covet ne’er will catch 
An opportunity to snatch. 
We are things of dry hours and the involuntary plan,
Grayed in, and gray. “Dream” makes a giddy sound, not strong
Like “rent,” “feeding a wife,” “satisfying a man.”
But could a dream send up through onion fumes
Its white and violet, fight with fried potatoes
And yesterday’s garbage ripening in the hall,
Flutter, or sing an ariaaria an elaborate song for one voice with orchestral accompaniment, appearing most often in opera (“aria” means “air” in Italian). down these rooms
Even if we were willing to let it in,
Had time to warm it, keep it very clean,
Anticipate a message, let it begin?
We wonder. But not well! not for a minute!
Since Number Five is out of the bathroom now,
We think of lukewarm water, hope to get in it. 
I tell you, hopeless grief is passionless; 
 That only men incredulous of despair, 
 Half-taught in anguish, through the midnight air 
 Beat upward to God’s throne in loud access 
 Of shrieking and reproach. Full desertness, 
 In souls as countries, lieth silent-bare 
 Under the blanching, vertical eye-glare 
 Of the absolute heavens. Deep-hearted man, express 
 Grief for thy dead in silence like to death— 
 Most like a monumental statue set 
 In everlasting watch and moveless woe 
 Till itself crumble to the dust beneath. 
 Touch it; the marble eyelids are not wet: 
 If it could weep, it could arise and go. 
if mama 
could see 
she would see   
lucy sprawling   
limbs of lucy 
decorating the 
backs of chairs 
lucy hair 
holding the mirrors up   
that reflect odd   
aspects of lucy. 
could hear 
she would hear 
lucysong rolled in the 
corners like lint 
exotic webs of lucysighs 
long lucy spiders explaining   
to obscure gods. 
could talk 
she would talk 
good girl   
good girl 
clean up your room. 
Drink to me only with thine eyes, 
         And I will pledge with mine; 
Or leave a kiss but in the cup, 
         And I’ll not look for wine. 
The thirst that from the soul doth rise 
         Doth ask a drink divine; 
But might I of Jove’s nectar sup, 
         I would not change for thine. 
I sent thee late a rosy wreath, 
         Not so much honouring thee 
As giving it a hope, that there 
         It could not withered be. 
But thou thereon didst only breathe, 
         And sent’st it back to me; 
Since when it grows, and smells, I swear, 
         Not of itself, but thee. 
There was such speed in her little body,   
And such lightness in her footfall,   
It is no wonder her brown study 
Astonishes us all. 
Her wars were bruited in our high window.   
We looked among orchard trees and beyond   
Where she took arms against her shadow,   
Or harried unto the pond 
The lazy geese, like a snow cloud 
Dripping their snow on the green grass,   
Tricking and stopping, sleepy and proud,   
Who cried in goose, Alas, 
For the tireless heart within the little   
Lady with rod that made them rise 
From their noon apple-dreams and scuttle   
Goose-fashion under the skies! 
But now go the bells, and we are ready,   
In one house we are sternly stopped 
To say we are vexed at her brown study,   
Lying so primly propped. 
I have never been fishing on the Susquehanna
or on any river for that matter
to be perfectly honest.
Not in July or any month
have I had the pleasure—if it is a pleasure—
of fishing on the Susquehanna.
I am more likely to be found
in a quiet room like this one—
a painting of a woman on the wall,
a bowl of tangerines on the table—
trying to manufacture the sensation
There is little doubt
that others have been fishing
on the Susquehanna,
rowing upstream in a wooden boat,
sliding the oars under the water
then raising them to drip in the light.
But the nearest I have ever come to
fishing on the Susquehanna
was one afternoon in a museum in Philadelphia
when I balanced a little egg of time
in front of a painting
in which that river curled around a bend
under a blue cloud-ruffled sky,
dense trees along the banks,
and a fellow with a red bandanna
sitting in a small, green
flat-bottom boat
holding the thin whip of a pole.
That is something I am unlikely
ever to do, I remember
saying to myself and the person next to me.
Then I blinked and moved on
to other American scenes
of haystacks, water whitening over rocks,
even one of a brown hare
who seemed so wired with alertness
I imagined him springing right out of the frame.
Often visitors there, saddened   
by lack of trees, go out   
to a promontory. 
Then, backed by the banded   
sunset, the trail   
of the Conquistadores, 
the father puts on the camera,   
the leather albatross,   
and has the children 
imitate saguaros. One 
at a time they stand there smiling,   
fingers up like the tines of a fork 
while the stately saguaro   
goes on being entered 
by wrens, diseases, and sunlight. 
The mother sits on a rock,   
arms folded 
across her breasts. To her 
the cactus looks scared,   
its needles 
like hair in cartoons. 
With its arms in preacher   
or waltz position,   
it gives the impression 
of great effort 
in every direction,   
like the mother. 
Thousands of these gray-green   
cacti cross the valley:   
nature repeating itself, 
children repeating nature,   
father repeating children   
and mother watching. 
Later, the children think   
the cactus was moral, 
had something to teach them, 
some survival technique   
or just regular beauty. 
But what else could it do? 
The only protection   
against death 
was to love solitude. 
My husband has a crush on Myrna Loy, 
and likes to rent her movies, for a treat. 
It makes some evenings harder to enjoy. 
The list of actresses who might employ 
him as their slave is too long to repeat. 
(My husband has a crush on Myrna Loy, 
Carole Lombard, Paulette Goddard, coy 
Jean Arthur with that voice as dry as wheat ...) 
Does he confess all this just to annoy 
a loyal spouse? I know I can’t compete. 
My husband has a crush on Myrna Loy. 
And can’t a woman have her dreamboats? Boy, 
I wouldn’t say my life is incomplete, 
but some evening I could certainly enjoy 
two hours with Cary Grant as my own toy. 
I guess, though, we were destined not to meet. 
which makes some evenings harder to enjoy. 
A sudden blow: the great wings beating still 
Above the staggering girl, her thighs caressed 
By the dark webs, her nape caught in his bill, 
He holds her helpless breast upon his breast. 
How can those terrified vague fingers push 
The feathered glory from her loosening thighs? 
And how can body, laid in that white rush, 
But feel the strange heart beating where it lies? 
A shudder in the loins engenders there 
The broken wall, the burning roof and tower 
And Agamemnon dead. 
                                  Being so caught up, 
So mastered by the brute blood of the air, 
Did she put on his knowledge with his power 
Before the indifferent beak could let her drop? 
They lie in parallel rows, 
on ice, head to tail, 
each a foot of luminosity 
barred with black bands, 
which divide the scales’ 
radiant sections 
like seams of lead 
in a Tiffany window. 
Iridescent, watery 
prismatics: think abalone, 
the wildly rainbowed 
mirror of a soapbubble sphere, 
think sun on gasoline. 
Splendor, and splendor, 
and not a one in any way 
distinguished from the other 
—nothing about them 
of individuality. Instead 
they’re all exact expressions 
of the one soul, 
each a perfect fulfilment 
of heaven’s template, 
mackerel essence. As if, 
after a lifetime arriving 
at this enameling, the jeweler’s 
made uncountable examples, 
each as intricate 
in its oily fabulation 
as the one before 
Suppose we could iridesce, 
like these, and lose ourselves 
entirely in the universe 
of shimmer—would you want 
to be yourself only, 
unduplicatable, doomed 
to be lost? They’d prefer, 
plainly, to be flashing participants, 
multitudinous. Even now 
they seem to be bolting 
forward, heedless of stasis. 
They don’t care they’re dead 
and nearly frozen, 
just as, presumably, 
they didn’t care that they were living: 
all, all for all, 
the rainbowed school 
and its acres of brilliant classrooms, 
in which no verb is singular, 
or every one is. How happy they seem, 
even on ice, to be together, selfless, 
which is the price of gleaming. 
Would you hear of an old-time sea-fight? 
Would you learn who won by the light of the moon and stars? 
List to the yarn, as my grandmother’s father the sailor told it to me. 
Our foe was no skulk in his ship I tell you, (said he,) 
His was the surly English pluck, and there is no tougher or truer, and never was, and never will be; 
Along the lower’d eve he came horribly raking us. 
We closed with him, the yards entangled, the cannon touch’d, 
My captain lash’d fast with his own hands. 
We had receiv’d some eighteen pound shots under the water, 
On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at the first fire, killing all around and blowing up overhead. 
Fighting at sun-down, fighting at dark, 
Ten o’clock at night, the full moon well up, our leaks on the gain, and five feet of water reported, 
The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in the after-hold to give them a chance for themselves. 
The transit to and from the magazine is now stopt by the sentinels, 
They see so many strange faces they do not know whom to trust. 
Our frigate takes fire, 
The other asks if we demand quarter? 
If our colors are struck and the fighting done? 
Now I laugh content, for I hear the voice of my little captain, 
We have not struck, he composedly cries, we have just begun our part of the fighting. 
Only three guns are in use, 
One is directed by the captain himself against the enemy’s mainmast, 
Two well serv’d with grape and canister silence his musketry and clear his decks. 
The tops alone second the fire of this little battery, especially the main-top, 
They hold out bravely during the whole of the action. 
Not a moment’s cease, 
The leaks gain fast on the pumps, the fire eats toward the powder-magazine. 
One of the pumps has been shot away, it is generally thought we are sinking. 
Serene stands the little captain, 
He is not hurried, his voice is neither high nor low, 
His eyes give more light to us than our battle-lanterns. 
Toward twelve there in the beams of the moon they surrender to us. 
After D.H.L.Your first thought when the light snaps on and the black wings
             clatter about the kitchen       is a bat
the clear part of  your mind considers rabies       the other part
             does not consider       knows only to startle
and cower away from the slap of  its wings       though it is soon
             clearly not a bat but a moth       and harmless
still you are shy of it       it clings to the hood of the stove
             not black but brown       its orange eyes sparkle
like televisions       its leg  joints are large enough to count
             how could you kill it       where would you hide the body
a creature so solid must have room for a soul
            and if  this is so       why not in a creature
half  its size       or half its size again       and so on
             down to the ants       clearly it must be saved
caught in a shopping bag and rushed to the front door
             afraid to crush it       feeling the plastic rattle
loosened into the night air       it batters the porch light
             throwing fitful shadows around the landing
That was a really big moth       is all you can say to the doorman
             who has watched your whole performance with a smile
the half-compassion and half-horror we feel for the creatures
             we want not to hurt       and prefer not to touch 
Your petitions—though they continue to bear   
just the one signature—have been duly recorded.   
Your anxieties—despite their constant, 
relatively narrow scope and inadvertent   
entertainment value—nonetheless serve   
to bring your person vividly to mind. 
Your repentance—all but obscured beneath   
a burgeoning, yellow fog of frankly more   
conspicuous resentment—is sufficient. 
Your intermittent concern for the sick,   
the suffering, the needy poor is sometimes   
recognizable to me, if not to them. 
Your angers, your zeal, your lipsmackingly   
righteous indignation toward the many   
whose habits and sympathies offend you—          
these must burn away before you’ll apprehend   
how near I am, with what fervor I adore 
precisely these, the several who rouse your passions. 
The world is too much with us; late and soon, 
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers;— 
Little we see in Nature that is ours; 
We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon! 
This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon; 
The winds that will be howling at all hours, 
And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers; 
For this, for everything, we are out of tune; 
It moves us not. Great God! I’d rather be 
A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn; 
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, 
Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn; 
Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea; 
Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn. 
Dear God, Our Heavenly Father, Gracious Lord,   
Mother Love and Maker, Light Divine, 
Atomic Fingertip, Cosmic Design, 
First Letter of the Alphabet, Last Word, 
Mutual Satisfaction, Cash Award, 
Auditor Who Approves Our Bottom Line,   
Examiner Who Says That We Are Fine, 
Oasis That All Sands Are Running Toward. 
I can say almost anything about you, 
O Big Idea, and with each epithet, 
Create new reasons to believe or doubt you,   
Black Hole, White Hole, Presidential Jet. 
But what’s the anything I must leave out? You   
Solve nothing but the problems that I set. 
Lincoln? 
He was a mystery in smoke and flags 
Saying yes to the smoke, yes to the flags, 
Yes to the paradoxes of democracy, 
Yes to the hopes of government 
Of the people by the people for the people, 
No to debauchery of the public mind, 
No to personal malice nursed and fed, 
Yes to the Constitution when a help, 
No to the Constitution when a hindrance 
Yes to man as a struggler amid illusions, 
Each man fated to answer for himself: 
Which of the faiths and illusions of mankind 
Must I choose for my own sustaining light 
To bring me beyond the present wilderness? 
       Lincoln? Was he a poet? 
       And did he write verses? 
“I have not willingly planted a thorn 
       in any man’s bosom.” 
I shall do nothing through malice: what 
       I deal with is too vast for malice.” 
Death was in the air. 
So was birth. 
If ever two were one, then surely we. 
If ever man were loved by wife, then thee. 
If ever wife was happy in a man, 
Compare with me, ye women, if you can. 
I prizeprize Value thy love more than whole mines of gold, 
Or all the riches that the Eastthe East East Indies, southeast Asia, including India; the English East India Company began in 1600. doth hold. 
My love is such that rivers cannot quench,My ... rivers cannot quench Compare the Song of Solomon: “Muche water can not quenche love, nether can the floods drowne it." (Geneva Bible) Also, quench could mean to satisfy.  
Nor oughtought Anything but love from thee give recompenserecompense Return payment; reward. 
Thy love is such I can no way repay; 
The heavens reward thee manifoldmanifold In abundance, I pray. 
Then while we live, in love let’s so perseverpersever Both to continue steadfastly, and in the Theological sense to remain in a state of grace. An earlier spelling of the word “persevere.”, 
That when we live no more, we may live ever. 
So by sixteen we move in packs 
learn to strut and slide 
in deliberate lowdown rhythm 
talk in a syn/co/pa/ted beat 
because we want so bad 
to be cool, never to be mistaken 
for white, even when we leave 
these rowdier L.A. streets— 
remember how we paint our eyes 
like gangsters 
flash our legs in nylons 
sassy black high heels 
or two inch zippered boots 
stack them by the door at night 
next to Daddy’s muddy gardening shoes. 
I don't know how it happened, but I fell—   
and I was immense, one dislocated arm   
wedged between two buildings. I felt some ribs   
had broken, perhaps a broken neck, too;   
I couldn't speak. My dress caught bunched   
about my thighs, and where my glasses shattered   
there'd spread something like a seacoast, or maybe   
it was a port. Where my hair tangled with power lines   
I felt a hot puddle of blood.   
                                                   I must have passed out,   
but when I woke, a crew of about fifty   
was building a winding stairway beside my breast   
and buttressing a platform on my sternum.   
I heard, as through cotton, the noise of hammers,   
circular saws, laughter, and some radio   
droning songs about love. Out the corner   
of one eye (I could open one eye a bit) I saw   
my pocketbook, its contents scattered, my lipstick's   
toppled silo glinting out of reach.   
And then, waving a tiny flashlight, a man   
entered my ear. I felt his boots sloshing   
the blood trickling there. He never came out.   
So some went looking, with flares, dogs, dynamite   
even: they burst my middle ear and found   
my skull, its cavern crammed with dark matter   
like a cross between a fungus and a cloud.   
They never found his body, though. And they never   
found or tried to find an explanation,   
I think, for me; they didn't seem to need one.   
Even now my legs subdue that dangerous   
sea, the water bright enough to cut   
the skin, where a lighthouse, perched on the tip   
of my great toe, each eight seconds rolls   
another flawless pearl across the waves.   
It keeps most ships from wrecking against my feet.   
On clear days, people stand beside the light;   
they watch the waves' blue heads slip up and down   
and scan for landmarks on the facing shore. 
The night John Henry is born an ax   
            of lightning splits the sky,   
and a hammer of thunder pounds the earth,   
      and the eagles and panthers cry! 
      John Henry—he says to his Ma and Pa: 
            “Get a gallon of barleycorn.   
      I want to start right, like a he-man child, 
            the night that I am born!” 
Says:   “I want some ham hocks, ribs, and jowls,   
            a pot of cabbage and greens;   
      some hoecackes, jam, and buttermilk,   
            a platter of pork and beans!” 
      John Henry’s Ma—she wrings her hands,   
            and his Pa—he scratches his head.   
      John Henry—he curses in giraffe-tall words,   
            flops over, and kicks down the bed.   
      He’s burning mad, like a bear on fire— 
            so he tears to the riverside.   
As he stoops to drink, Old Man River gets scared 
            and runs upstream to hide! 
    Some say he was born in Georgia—O Lord! 
            Some say in Alabam.   
But it’s writ on the rock at the Big Bend Tunnel:   
            “Lousyana was my home.   So scram!”   
Earth’s Wrath at our assaults is slow to come
 But relentless when it does. It has to do
 With catastrophic change, and with the limit
 At which one order more of Magnitude
 Will bring us to a qualitative change
 And disasters drastically different
 From those we daily have to know about. 
 As with the speed of light, where speed itself
 Becomes a limit and an absolute;
 As with the splitting of the atom
 And a little later of the nucleus;
 As with the millions rising into billions—
 The piker’s kind in terms of money, yes,
 But a million2 in terms of time and space
 As the universe grew vast while the earth
 Our habitat diminished to the size
 Of a billiard ball, both relative
 To the cosmos and to the numbers of ourselves,
 The doubling numbers, the earth could accommodate.
 We stand now in the place and limit of time
 Where hardest knowledge is turning into dream,
 And nightmares still contained in sleeping dark
 Seem on the point of bringing into day
 The sweating panic that starts the sleeper up.
 One or another nightmare may come true,
 And what to do then? What in the world to do? 
I am four in this photograph, standing   
on a wide strip of Mississippi beach,   
my hands on the flowered hips 
of a bright bikini. My toes dig in,   
curl around wet sand. The sun cuts   
the rippling Gulf in flashes with each   
tidal rush. Minnows dart at my feet 
glinting like switchblades. I am alone 
except for my grandmother, other side   
of the camera, telling me how to pose.   
It is 1970, two years after they opened   
the rest of this beach to us,   
forty years since the photograph   
where she stood on a narrow plot   
of sand marked colored, smiling, 
her hands on the flowered hips   
of a cotton meal-sack dress. 
The very flatness
of portraits
makes for nostalgia
in the connoisseur.
Here’s the latest
little lip of wave
to flatten
and spread thin.
Let’s say
it shows our recklessness,
our fast gun,
our self-consciousness
which was really
our infatuation
with our own fame,
our escapes,
the easy way
we’d blend in
with the peasantry,
our loyalty
to our old gang
from among whom
it was our nature
to be singled out 
They got old, they got old and died. But first—
okay but first they composed plangent depictions
of how much they lost and how much cared about losing.
Meantime their hair got thin and more thin
as their shoulders went slumpy. Okay but
not before the photo albums got arranged by them,
arranged with a niftiness, not just two or three
but eighteen photo albums, yes eighteen eventually,
eighteen albums proving the beauty of them (and not someone else),
them and their relations and friends, incontrovertible
playing croquet in that Bloomington yard, 
floating on those comic inflatables at Dow Lake, 
giggling at the Dairy Queen, waltzing at the wedding, 
building a Lego palace on the porch, 
holding the baby beside the rental truck, 
leaning on the Hemingway statue at Pamplona, 
discussing the eternity of art in that Sardinian restaurant.
Yes! And so, quite frankly—at the end of the day— 
they got old and died okay sure but quite frankly 
how much does that matter in view of 
the eighteen photo albums, big ones 
thirteen inches by twelve inches each 
full of such undeniable beauty? 
This night nurse is different.
She walks into my room and does not turn the light on.
She thinks I am sleeping.
I have just barely opened my left eye,
am looking through the slightest slit,
as moonlight exposes the room
for what it really is — a collection
of surfaces; lines and planes, mostly.
The night nurse puts a foot up on the radiator
and braces her clipboard on her knee
as she appears to take down a few notes.
I imagine she is working on a sonnet,
and that her ankle looks like polished walnut.
You imagine she is working on a crossword,
and that her feet are killing her.
The slightest slit is like an old gate
at a Japanese tea garden at night,
in the rain, that is supposed to be closed,
that is supposed to be locked.
“Someone has locked up poorly,” you’d say.
“Incorrectly.” But no one has asked you. 
‘Tis true, ‘tis day, what though it be? 
O wilt thou therefore rise from me? 
Why should we rise because ‘tis light? 
Did we lie down because ‘twas night? 
Love, which in spite of darkness brought us hither, 
Should in despite of light keep us together. 
Light hath no tongue, but is all eye; 
If it could speak as well as spy, 
This were the worst that it could say, 
That being well I fain would stay, 
And that I loved my heart and honour so, 
That I would not from him, that had them, go. 
Must business thee from hence remove? 
Oh, that’s the worst disease of love, 
The poor, the foul, the false, love can 
Admit, but not the busied man. 
He which hath business, and makes love, doth do 
Such wrong, as when a married man doth woo. 
Just when it has seemed I couldn’t bear   
   one more friend   
waking with a tumor, one more maniac   
with a perfect reason, often a sweetness   
   has come   
and changed nothing in the world   
except the way I stumbled through it,   
   for a while lost   
in the ignorance of loving   
someone or something, the world shrunk   
   to mouth-size,   
hand-size, and never seeming small.   
I acknowledge there is no sweetness   
   that doesn’t leave a stain,   
no sweetness that’s ever sufficiently sweet ....   
Tonight a friend called to say his lover   
   was killed in a car   
he was driving. His voice was low   
and guttural, he repeated what he needed   
   to repeat, and I repeated   
the one or two words we have for such grief   
until we were speaking only in tones.   
   Often a sweetness comes   
as if on loan, stays just long enough   
to make sense of what it means to be alive,   
   then returns to its dark   
source. As for me, I don’t care   
where it’s been, or what bitter road   
   it’s traveled   
to come so far, to taste so good. 
When I heard the learn’d astronomer, 
When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me, 
When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them, 
When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much applause in the lecture-room, 
How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick, 
Till rising and gliding out I wander’d off by myself, 
In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time, 
Look’d up in perfect silence at the stars. 
after García LorcaOnce I wasn’t always so plain. 
I was strewn feathers on a cross 
of dune, an expanse of ocean 
at my feet, garlands of gulls. 
   Sirens and gulls. They couldn’t tame you. 
You know as well as they: to be 
a dove is to bear the falcon 
at your breast, your nights, your seas. 
   My fear is simple, heart-faced 
above a flare of etchings, a lineage 
in letters, my sudden stare. It’s you. 
   It’s you! sang the heart upon its mantel 
pelvis. Blush of my breath, catch 
of my see—beautiful bird—It’s you. 
Oh, Hope! thou soother sweet of human woes! 
      How shall I lure thee to my haunts forlorn! 
For me wilt thou renew the withered rose, 
      And clear my painful path of pointed thorn? 
Ah come, sweet nymph! in smiles and softness drest, 
      Like the young hours that lead the tender year 
Enchantress come! and charm my cares to rest: 
      Alas! the flatterer flies, and will not hear! 
A prey to fear, anxiety, and pain, 
      Must I a sad existence still deplore? 
Lo! the flowers fade, but all the thorns remain, 
      ‘For me the vernal garland blooms no more.’ 
Come then, ‘pale Misery’s love!’ be thou my cure, 
And I will bless thee, who though slow art sure. 
Closed Mondaysis music    is men
off early from work    is waiting
for the chance at the chair
while the eagle claws holes
in your pockets    keeping
time    by the turning
of rusty fans    steel flowers with
cold breezes    is having nothing
better to do    than guess at the years
of hair    matted beneath the soiled caps
of drunks    the pain of running
a fisted comb through stubborn
knots    is the dark dirty low
down blues    the tender heads
of sons fresh from cornrows    all
wonder at losing    half their height
is a mother gathering hair    for good 
luck    for a soft wig    is the round
difficulty of ears    the peach
faced boys asking Eddie
to cut in parts and arrows
wanting to have their names read
for just a few days    and among thin
jazz    is the quick brush of a done
head    the black flood around
your feet    grandfathers
stopping their games of ivory
dominoes    just before they reach the bone
yard    is winking widowers announcing
cut it clean off    I’m through courting
and hair only gets in the way
I am the mother of sorrows, 
   I am the ender of grief; 
I am the bud and the blossom, 
   I am the late-falling leaf. 
I am thy priest and thy poet, 
   I am thy serf and thy king; 
I cure the tears of the heartsick, 
   When I come near they shall sing. 
White are my hands as the snowdrop; 
   Swart are my fingers as clay; 
Dark is my frown as the midnight, 
   Fair is my brow as the day. 
Battle and war are my minions, 
   Doing my will as divine; 
I am the calmer of passions, 
   Peace is a nursling of mine. 
Speak to me gently or curse me, 
   Seek me or fly from my sight; 
I am thy fool in the morning, 
   Thou art my slave in the night. 
Down to the grave will I take thee, 
   Out from the noise of the strife; 
Then shalt thou see me and know me— 
   Death, then, no longer, but life. 
Then shalt thou sing at my coming, 
   Kiss me with passionate breath, 
Clasp me and smile to have thought me 
   Aught save the foeman of Death. 
Come to me, brother, when weary, 
   Come when thy lonely heart swells; 
I’ll guide thy footsteps and lead thee 
   Down where the Dream Woman dwells. 
Too high, too high to pluck 
My heart shall swing. 
A fruit no bee shall suck, 
No wasp shall sting. 
If on some night of cold 
It falls to ground 
In apple-leaves of gold 
I’ll wrap it round. 
And I shall seal it up 
With spice and salt, 
In a carven silver cup, 
In a deep vault. 
Before my eyes are blind 
And my lips mute, 
I must eat core and rind 
Of that same fruit. 
Before my heart is dust 
At the end of all, 
Eat it I must, I must 
Were it bitter gall. 
But I shall keep it sweet 
By some strange art; 
Wild honey I shall eat 
When I eat my heart. 
O honey cool and chaste 
As clover’s breath! 
Sweet Heaven I shall taste 
Before my death. 
Skimming lightly, wheeling still, 
      The swallows fly low 
Over the field in clouded days, 
      The forest-field of Shiloh— 
Over the field where April rain 
Solaced the parched ones stretched in pain 
Through the pause of night 
That followed the Sunday fight 
      Around the church of Shiloh— 
The church so lone, the log-built one, 
That echoed to many a parting groan 
            And natural prayer 
      Of dying foemen mingled there— 
Foemen at morn, but friends at eve— 
      Fame or country least their care: 
(What like a bullet can undeceive!) 
      But now they lie low, 
While over them the swallows skim, 
      And all is hushed at Shiloh. 
It ever was allow’d, dear Madam,   
Ev’n from the days of father Adam,   
Of all perfection flesh is heir to,   
Fair patience is the gentlest virtue;
This is a truth our grandames teach,   
Our poets sing, and parsons preach;   
Yet after all, dear Moll, the fact is   
We seldom put it into practice;   
I’ll warrant (if one knew the truth)   
You’ve call’d me many an idle youth,   
And styled me rude ungrateful bear,   
Enough to make a parson swear.   
      I shall not make a long oration   
      In order for my vindication,   
      For what the plague can I say more   
      Than lazy dogs have done before;   
      Such stuff is nought but mere tautology,   
      And so take that for my apology.   
First then for custards, my dear Mary,   
The produce of your dainty dairy,   
For stew’d, for bak’d, for boil’d, for roast,   
And all the teas and all the toast;   
With thankful tongue and bowing attitude,   
I here present you with my gratitude:   
Next for you apples, pears and plums   
Acknowledgment in order comes;   
For wine, for ale, for fowl, for fish—for   
Ev’n all one’s appetite can wish for:   
But O ye pens, and O ye pencils,   
And all ye scribbling utensils,   
Say in what words and in what metre, 
Shall unfeign’d admiration greet her,   
For that rich banquet so refin’d   
Her conversation gave the mind;   
The solid meal of sense and worth,   
Set off by the desert of mirth;   
Wit’s fruit and pleasure’s genial bowl,   
And all the joyous flow of soul;   
For these, and every kind ingredient   
That form’d your love—your most obedient.
Be music, night, 
That her sleep may go 
Where angels have their pale tall choirs 
Be a hand, sea, 
That her dreams may watch 
Thy guidesman touching the green flesh of the world 
Be a voice, sky, 
That her beauties may be counted   
And the stars will tilt their quiet faces   
Into the mirror of her loveliness 
Be a road, earth, 
That her walking may take thee 
Where the towns of heaven lift their breathing spires 
O be a world and a throne, God, 
That her living may find its weather 
And the souls of ancient bells in a child's book   
Shall lead her into Thy wondrous house 
I would my soul were like the bird   
That dares the vastness undeterred.   
Look, where the bluebird on the bough   
Breaks into rapture even now!   
He sings, tip-top, the tossing elm   
As tho he would a world o’erwhelm.   
Indifferent to the void he rides   
Upon the wind’s eternal tides. 
He tosses gladly on the gale, 
For well he knows he can not fail— 
Knows if the bough breaks, still his wings   
Will bear him upward while he sings! 
To prepare the body, 
aim for the translucent perfection 
you find in the sliced shavings 
of a pickled turnip. 
In order for this to happen, 
you must avoid the sun,   
protect the face 
under a paper parasol   
until it is bruised white   
like the skin of lilies.   
Use white soap 
from a blue porcelain   
dish for this. 
Restrict yourself. 
Eat the whites of things:   
tender bamboo shoots, 
the veins of the young iris,   
the clouded eye of a fish. 
Then wrap the body, 
as if it were a perfumed gift, 
in pieces of silk 
held together with invisible threads 
like a kite, weighing no more 
than a handful of crushed chrysanthemums.   
Light enough to float in the wind. 
You want the effect 
of koi moving through water. 
When the light leaves   
the room, twist lilacs   
into the lacquered hair 
piled high like a complicated shrine.   
There should be tiny bells 
inserted somewhere   
in the web of hair   
to imitate crickets 
singing in a hidden grove. 
Reveal the nape of the neck, 
your beauty spot.   
Hold the arrangement. 
If your spine slacks   
and you feel faint, 
remember the hand-picked flower   
set in the front alcove,   
which, just this morning, 
you so skillfully wired into place.   
How poised it is!   
Petal and leaf 
curving like a fan, 
the stem snipped and wedged 
into the metal base— 
to appear like a spontaneous accident. 
Nuns fret not at their convent’s narrow room; 
And hermits are contented with their cells; 
And students with their pensive citadels; 
Maids at the wheel, the weaver at his loom, 
Sit blithe and happy; bees that soar for bloom, 
High as the highest Peak of Furness-fells, 
Will murmur by the hour in foxglove bells: 
In truth the prison, into which we doom 
Ourselves, no prison is: and hence for me, 
In sundry moods, ’twas pastime to be bound 
Within the Sonnet’s scanty plot of ground; 
Pleased if some Souls (for such there needs must be) 
Who have felt the weight of too much liberty, 
Should find brief solace there, as I have found. 
My father knows the proper way
   The nation should be run;
He tells us children every day
   Just what should now be done.
He knows the way to fix the trusts,
   He has a simple plan;
But if the furnace needs repairs,
   We have to hire a man.
My father, in a day or two
   Could land big thieves in jail;
There’s nothing that he cannot do,
   He knows no word like “fail.”
“Our confidence” he would restore,
   Of that there is no doubt;
But if there is a chair to mend,
   We have to send it out.
All public questions that arise,
   He settles on the spot;
He waits not till the tumult dies,
   But grabs it while it’s hot.
In matters of finance he can
   Tell Congress what to do;
But, O, he finds it hard to meet
   His bills as they fall due.
It almost makes him sick to read
   The things law-makers say;
Why, father’s just the man they need,
   He never goes astray.
All wars he’d very quickly end,
   As fast as I can write it;
But when a neighbor starts a fuss,
   ’Tis mother has to fight it.
In conversation father can
   Do many wondrous things;
He’s built upon a wiser plan
   Than presidents or kings.
He knows the ins and outs of each
   And every deep transaction;
We look to him for theories,
   But look to ma for action. 
Grateful for their tour
of the pharmacy,
the first-grade class
has drawn these pictures,
each self-portrait taped
to the window-glass,
faces wide to the street,
round and available,
with parallel lines for hair.
I like this one best: Brian,
whose attenuated name
fills a quarter of the frame,
stretched beside impossible
legs descending from the ball
of his torso, two long arms
springing from that same
central sphere. He breathes here,
on his page. It isn’t craft
that makes this figure come alive;
Brian draws just balls and lines,
in wobbly crayon strokes.
Why do some marks
seem to thrill with life,
possess a portion
of the nervous energy
in their maker’s hand?
That big curve of a smile
reaches nearly to the rim
of his face; he holds
a towering ice cream,
brown spheres teetering
on their cone,
a soda fountain gift
half the length of him
—as if it were the flag
of his own country held high
by the unadorned black line
of his arm. Such naked support
for so much delight! Artless boy,
he’s found a system of beauty:
he shows us pleasure
and what pleasure resists.
The ice cream is delicious.
He’s frail beside his relentless standard.
  
One girl a full head taller 
Than the other—into their Sunday dresses.   
First, the slip, hardly a piece of fabric,   
Softly stitched and printed with a bud. 
I’m not their mother, and tangle, then untangle   
The whole cloth—on backwards, have to grab it   
Round their necks. But they know how to pull   
Arms in, a reflex of being dressed, 
And also, a child’s faith. The mass of stuff   
That makes the Sunday frocks collapses 
In my hands and finds its shape, only because   
They understand the drape of it— 
These skinny keys to intricate locks.   
The buttons are a problem 
For a surgeon. How would she connect   
These bony valves and stubborn eyelets? 
The filmy dress revolves in my blind fingers.   
The slots work one by one. 
And when they’re put together, 
Not like puppets or those doll-saints   
That bring tears to true believers, 
But living children, somebody’s real daughters,   
They do become more real. 
They say, “Stop it!” and “Give it back!”   
And “I don’t want to!” They’ll kiss 
A doll’s hard features, whispering, 
“I’m sorry.” I know just why my mother   
Used to worry. Your clothes don’t keep   
You close—it’s nakedness. 
Clad in my boots and holster, 
I would roam with my six-gun buddies. 
We dealt fake death to one another, 
Fell and rolled in filth and rose, 
Grimy with wounds, then headed home. 
But Sunday ... what was that tired explanation   
Given for wearing clothes that 
Scratched and shone and weighed like a slow hour?   
That we should shine—in gratitude. 
So, I give that explanation, undressing them,   
And wait for the result. 
After a day like Sunday, such a long one, 
When they lie down, half-dead, 
To be undone, they won’t help me. 
They cry, “It’s not my fault.” 
There's a place I know where the birds swing low, 
      And wayward vines go roaming, 
Where the lilacs nod, and a marble god 
      Is pale, in scented gloaming. 
And at sunset there comes a lady fair 
      Whose eyes are deep with yearning. 
By an old, old gate does the lady wait 
      Her own true love's returning. 
But the days go by, and the lilacs die, 
      And trembling birds seek cover; 
Yet the lady stands, with her long white hands 
      Held out to greet her lover. 
And it's there she'll stay till the shadowy day 
      A monument they grave her. 
She will always wait by the same old gate, — 
      The gate her true love gave her. 
Lo! ’t is a gala night 
   Within the lonesome latter years!   
An angel throng, bewinged, bedight 
   In veils, and drowned in tears,   
Sit in a theatre, to see 
   A play of hopes and fears, 
While the orchestra breathes fitfully   
   The music of the spheres. 
Mimes, in the form of God on high,   
   Mutter and mumble low, 
And hither and thither fly— 
   Mere puppets they, who come and go   
At bidding of vast formless things 
   That shift the scenery to and fro, 
Flapping from out their Condor wings 
   Invisible Wo! 
That motley drama—oh, be sure   
   It shall not be forgot! 
With its Phantom chased for evermore   
   By a crowd that seize it not, 
Through a circle that ever returneth in   
   To the self-same spot, 
And much of Madness, and more of Sin,   
   And Horror the soul of the plot. 
But see, amid the mimic rout, 
   A crawling shape intrude! 
A blood-red thing that writhes from out   
   The scenic solitude! 
It writhes!—it writhes!—with mortal pangs   
The mimes become its food, 
And seraphs sob at vermin fangs 
   In human gore imbued. 
Out—out are the lights—out all!   
   And, over each quivering form, 
The curtain, a funeral pall, 
   Comes down with the rush of a storm,   
While the angels, all pallid and wan,   
   Uprising, unveiling, affirm 
That the play is the tragedy, “Man,”   
   And its hero, the Conqueror Worm. 
Airport bus from JFK 
cruising through Queens 
passing huge endless cemetery   
by Long Island’s old expressway 
(once a dirt path for wheelless Indians)   
myriad small tombstones tilted up   
gesturing statues on parapets   
stone arms or wings upraised   
lost among illegible inscriptions   
And the setting yellow sun 
painting all of them 
on one side only 
with an ochre brush 
Rows and rows and rows and rows   
of small stone slabs 
tilted toward the sun forever   
While on the far horizon 
Mannahatta’s great stone slabs   
skyscraper tombs and parapets   
casting their own long black shadows   
over all these long-haired graves   
the final restless places 
of old-country potato farmers   
dustbin pawnbrokers 
dead dagos and Dublin bouncers   
tinsmiths and blacksmiths and roofers   
house painters and house carpenters   
cabinet makers and cigar makers   
garment workers and streetcar motormen   
railroad switchmen and signal salesmen   
swabbers and sweepers and swampers   
steam-fitters and key-punch operators   
ward heelers and labor organizers   
railroad dicks and smalltime mafiosi   
shopkeepers and saloon keepers and doormen 
icemen and middlemen and conmen   
housekeepers and housewives and dowagers   
French housemaids and Swedish cooks   
Brooklyn barmaids and Bronxville butlers   
opera singers and gandy dancers   
pitchers and catchers 
in the days of ragtime baseball   
poolroom hustlers and fight promoters   
Catholic sisters of charity   
parish priests and Irish cops   
Viennese doctors of delirium   
now all abandoned in eternity   
parcels in a dead-letter office   
inscrutable addresses on them   
beyond further deliverance   
in an America wheeling past them   
and disappearing oblivious   
into East River’s echoing tunnels   
down the great American drain 
Come live with me and be my love, 
And we will all the pleasures prove, 
That Valleys, groves, hills, and fields, 
Woods, or steepy mountain yields. 
And we will sit upon the Rocks, 
Seeing the Shepherds feed their flocks, 
By shallow Rivers to whose falls 
Melodious birds sing Madrigals. 
And I will make thee beds of Roses 
And a thousand fragrant posies, 
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle 
Embroidered all with leaves of Myrtle; 
A gown made of the finest wool 
Which from our pretty Lambs we pull; 
Fair lined slippers for the cold, 
With buckles of the purest gold; 
A belt of straw and Ivy buds, 
With Coral clasps and Amber studs: 
And if these pleasures may thee move, 
Come live with me, and be my love. 
The Shepherds’ Swains shall dance and sing 
For thy delight each May-morning: 
If these delights thy mind may move, 
Then live with me, and be my love. 
You've heard me, scornful, harsh, and discontented, 
   Mocking and loathing War: you've asked me why 
Of my old, silly sweetness I've repented— 
   My ecstasies changed to an ugly cry. 
You are aware that once I sought the Grail, 
   Riding in armour bright, serene and strong; 
And it was told that through my infant wail 
   There rose immortal semblances of song. 
But now I've said good-bye to Galahad, 
   And am no more the knight of dreams and show: 
For lust and senseless hatred make me glad, 
   And my killed friends are with me where I go. 
Wound for red wound I burn to smite their wrongs; 
And there is absolution in my songs. 
The morning comes, and thickening clouds prevail,
    Hanging like curtains all the horizon round,
Or overhead in heavy stillness sail;
    So still is day, it seems like night profound;
Scarce by the city’s din the air is stirred,
    And dull and deadened comes its every sound;
The cock’s shrill, piercing voice subdued is heard,
    By the thick folds of muffling vapors drowned.
Dissolved in mists the hills and trees appear,
    Their outlines lost and blended with the sky;
And well-known objects, that to all are near,
    No longer seem familiar to the eye,
But with fantastic forms they mock the sight,
As when we grope amid the gloom of night. 
What if   it were possible to vanquish
All this shame with a wash of   varnish
Instead of wishing the stain would vanish?
What if   you gave it a glossy finish?
What if   there were a way to burnish
All this foolishness, all the anguish?
What if   you gave yourself   leave to ravish
All these ravages with famished relish?
What if   this were your way to flourish?
What if   the self   you love to punish —
Knavish, peevish, wolfish, sheepish —
Were all slicked up in something lavish?
Why so squeamish? Why make a fetish
Out of everything you must relinquish?
Why not embellish what you can’t abolish?
What would be left if   you couldn’t brandish
All the slavishness you’ve failed to banish?
What would you be without this gibberish?
What if   the true worth of the varnish
Were to replenish your resolve to vanquish
Every vain wish before you vanish? 
Looking into my daughter’s eyes I read   
Beneath the innocence of morning flesh   
Concealed, hintings of death she does not heed. 
Coldest of winds have blown this hair, and mesh 
Of seaweed snarled these miniatures of hands; 
The night’s slow poison, tolerant and bland, 
Has moved her blood. Parched years that I have seen   
That may be hers appear: foul, lingering   
Death in certain war, the slim legs green.   
Or, fed on hate, she relishes the sting   
Of others’ agony; perhaps the cruel   
Bride of a syphilitic or a fool.   
These speculations sour in the sun.   
I have no daughter. I desire none. 
For Kenneth KochYou don't need a pony   
to connect you to the unseeable   
or an airplane to connect you to the sky.   
Necessary it is to love to live   
and there are many manuals   
but in all important ways   
one is on one's own.   
You need not cut off your hand.   
No need to eat a bouquet.   
Your head becomes a peach pit.   
Your tongue a honeycomb.   
Necessary it is to live to love,   
to charge into the burning tower   
then charge back out   
and necessary it is to die.   
Even for the trees, even for the pony   
connecting you to what can't be grasped.   
The injured gazelle falls behind the   
herd. One last wild enjambment.   
Because of the sores in his mouth,   
the great poet struggles with a dumpling.   
His work has enlarged the world   
but the world is about to stop including him.   
He is the tower the world runs out of.   
When something becomes ash,   
there's nothing you can do to turn it back.   
About this, even diamonds do not lie. 
How much delight before we collapse
How much earth in the lungs
How much wine
When we want more
When the weeds sprawl
It is not what you think
Think how fast some landscapes change
the lover, the gardener's grand idea,
the failing Maple
the boat about to capsize
the correction
the hand's reflection
the impossibile replication of weight
versus time
how it will never mean what you want 
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, 
And sorry I could not travel both 
And be one traveler, long I stood 
And looked down one as far as I could 
To where it bent in the undergrowth; 
Then took the other, as just as fair, 
And having perhaps the better claim, 
Because it was grassy and wanted wear; 
Though as for that the passing there 
Had worn them really about the same, 
And both that morning equally lay 
In leaves no step had trodden black. 
Oh, I kept the first for another day! 
Yet knowing how way leads on to way, 
I doubted if I should ever come back. 
I shall be telling this with a sigh 
Somewhere ages and ages hence: 
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I— 
I took the one less traveled by, 
And that has made all the difference. 
Man, the egregious egoist, 
(In mystery the twig is bent,) 
Imagines, by some mental twist, 
That he alone is sentient 
Of the intolerable load 
Which on all living creatures lies, 
Nor stoops to pity in the toad 
The speechless sorrow of its eyes. 
He asks no questions of the snake, 
Nor plumbs the phosphorescent gloom 
Where lidless fishes, broad awake, 
Swim staring at a night-mare doom. 
Talent is what they say 
you have after the novel 
is published and favorably 
reviewed. Beforehand what 
you have is a tedious 
delusion, a hobby like knitting. 
Work is what you have done 
after the play is produced 
and the audience claps. 
Before that friends keep asking 
when you are planning to go 
out and get a job. 
Genius is what they know you 
had after the third volume 
of remarkable poems. Earlier 
they accuse you of withdrawing, 
ask why you don’t have a baby, 
call you a bum. 
The reason people want M.F.A.’s, 
take workshops with fancy names 
when all you can really 
learn is a few techniques, 
typing instructions and some- 
body else’s mannerisms 
is that every artist lacks 
a license to hang on the wall 
like your optician, your vet 
proving you may be a clumsy sadist 
whose fillings fall into the stew 
but you’re certified a dentist. 
The real writer is one 
who really writes. Talent 
is an invention like phlogiston 
after the fact of fire. 
Work is its own cure. You have to 
like it better than being loved. 
For Christopher MerrillSwear by the olive in the God-kissed land— 
There is no sugar in the promised land. 
Why must the bars turn neon now when, Love,   
I’m already drunk in your capitalist land? 
If home is found on both sides of the globe, 
home is of course here—and always a missed land. 
The hour’s come to redeem the pledge (not wholly?)   
in Fate’s "Long years ago we made a tryst" land. 
Clearly, these men were here only to destroy,   
a mosque now the dust of a prejudiced land. 
Will the Doomsayers die, bitten with envy,   
when springtime returns to our dismissed land? 
The prisons fill with the cries of children. 
Then how do you subsist, how do you persist, Land? 
“Is my love nothing for I’ve borne no children?” 
I’m with you, Sappho, in that anarchist land. 
A hurricane is born when the wings flutter ...   
Where will the butterfly, on my wrist, land? 
You made me wait for one who wasn’t even there   
though summer had finished in that tourist land. 
Do the blind hold temples close to their eyes   
when we steal their gods for our atheist land? 
Abandoned bride, Night throws down her jewels   
so Rome—on our descent—is an amethyst land. 
At the moment the heart turns terrorist, 
are Shahid’s arms broken, O Promised Land? 
We pull off 
to a road shack 
in Massachusetts 
to watch men walk 
on the moon. We did   
the same thing 
for three two one 
blast off, and now 
we watch the same men   
bounce in and out 
of craters. I want 
a Coke and a hamburger. 
Because the men 
are walking on the moon   
which is now irrefutably   
not green, not cheese, 
not a shiny dime floating   
in a cold blue, 
the way I'd thought, 
the road shack people don't 
notice we are a black   
family not from there,   
the way it mostly goes.   
This talking through 
static, bounces in space- 
boots, tethered   
to cords is much   
stranger, stranger 
even than we are. 
Sometimes I long to be the woodpile, 
cut-apart trees soon to be smoke, 
or even the smoke itself, 
sinewy ghost of ash and air, going 
wherever I want to, at least for a while. 
Neither inside nor out, 
neither lost nor home, no longer 
a shape or a name, I’d pass through 
all the broken windows of the world. 
It’s not a wish for consciousness to end. 
It’s not the appetite an army has 
for its own emptying heart, 
but a hunger to stand now and then 
alone on the death-grounds, 
where the dogs of the self are feeding. 
What I notice first within 
          this rough scene fixed
in memory is the rare 
          quality of its lightning, as if
those bolts were clipped 
          from a comic book, pasted
on low cloud, or fashioned 
          with cardboard, daubed
with gilt then hung overhead 
          on wire and fine hooks.
What I hear most clearly 
          within that thunder now
is its grief—a moan, a long 
          lament echoing, an ache.
And the rain? Raucous enough, 
          pounding, but oddly 
musical, and, well, 
          eager to entertain, solicitous.
No storm since has been framed 
          with such matter-of-fact 
artifice, nor to such comic 
          effect. No, the thousand-plus 
storms since then have turned 
          increasingly artless, 
arbitrary, bearing—every 
          one of them—a numbing burst.
And today, from the west a gust 
          and a filling pressure
pulsing in the throat—offering 
          little or nothing to make light of. 
I think I should have loved you presently, 
And given in earnest words I flung in jest; 
And lifted honest eyes for you to see, 
And caught your hand against my cheek and breast; 
And all my pretty follies flung aside 
That won you to me, and beneath your gaze, 
Naked of reticence and shorn of pride, 
Spread like a chart my little wicked ways. 
I, that had been to you, had you remained, 
But one more waking from a recurrent dream, 
Cherish no less the certain stakes I gained, 
And walk your memory’s halls, austere, supreme, 
A ghost in marble of a girl you knew 
Who would have loved you in a day or two. 
When we first heard from blocks away 
the fog truck’s blustery roar, 
we dropped our toys, leapt from our meals,   
and scrambled out the door 
into an evening briefly fuzzy. 
We yearned to be transformed— 
translated past confining flesh 
to disembodied spirit. We swarmed 
in thick smoke, taking human form   
before we blurred again, 
turned vague and then invisible,   
in temporary heaven. 
Freed of bodies by the fog, 
we laughed, we sang, we shouted.   
We were our voices, nothing else.   
Voice was all we wanted. 
The white clouds tumbled down our streets   
pursued by spellbound children   
who chased the most distorting clouds, 
ecstatic in the poison. 
Lord’s lost Him His mockingbird,   
       His fancy warbler; 
       Satan sweet-talked her, 
       four bullets hushed her. 
       Who would have thought 
       she’d end that way? 
Four bullets hushed her. And the world a-clang with evil.   
Who’s going to make old hardened sinner men tremble now   
and the righteous rock?          
Oh who and oh who will sing Jesus down 
to help with struggling and doing without and being colored   
all through blue Monday? 
Till way next Sunday? 
       All those angels 
       in their cretonne clouds and finery   
       the true believer saw 
       when she rared back her head and sang,   
       all those angels are surely weeping.   
Four holes in her heart. The gold works wrecked.   
But she looks so natural in her big bronze coffin   
among the Broken Hearts and Gates-Ajar,   
it’s as if any moment she’d lift her head 
from its pillow of chill gardenias 
and turn this quiet into shouting Sunday 
and make folks forget what she did on Monday. 
       Oh, Satan sweet-talked her,   
       and four bullets hushed her.   
       Lord’s lost Him His diva,   
       His fancy warbler’s gone.   
       Who would have thought, 
       who would have thought she’d end that way? 
After a series of indiscretions a man stumbled homeward, thinking, now that I am going down from my misbehavior I am to be forgiven, because how I acted was not the true self, which I am now returning to. And I am not to be blamed for the past, because I’m to be seen as one redeemed in the present...          But when he got to the threshold of his house his house said, go away, I am not at home.          Not at home? A house is always at home; where else can it be? said the man.          I am not at home to you, said his house.           And so the man stumbled away into another series of indiscretions...	
I have lately come to the conclusion that I am Eve,alias Mrs. Adam. You know, there is no accountof her death in the Bible, and why am I not Eve?                    Emily Dickinson in a letter,                            12 January, 1846Wake up,
you’ll need your wits about you.
This is not a dream,
but a woman who loves you, speaking.
She was there
when you cried out;
she brushed the terror away.
She knew
when it was time to sin.
You were wise
to let her handle it,
and leave that place.
We couldn’t speak at first
for the bitter knowledge,
the sweet taste of memory
on our tongues.
Listen, it’s time.
You were chosen too,
to put the world together. 
That hour-glass-backed, 
orchard-legged, 
heavy-headed will, 
paper-folded, 
wedge-contorted, 
savage—dense to kill— 
pulls back on backward-moving, 
arching 
high legs still, 
lowered through a deep, knees-reaching, 
feathered down 
green will, 
antenna-honest, 
thread-descending, 
carpeted as if with skill, 
a focus-changing, 
sober-reaching, 
tracing, killing will. 
The sky is cloudy, yellowed by the smoke. 
For view there are the houses opposite 
Cutting the sky with one long line of wall 
Like solid fog: far as the eye can stretch 
Monotony of surface & of form 
Without a break to hang a guess upon. 
No bird can make a shadow as it flies, 
For all is shadow, as in ways o'erhung 
By thickest canvass, where the golden rays 
Are clothed in hemp. No figure lingering 
Pauses to feed the hunger of the eye 
Or rest a little on the lap of life. 
All hurry on & look upon the ground, 
Or glance unmarking at the passers by 
The wheels are hurrying too, cabs, carriages 
All closed, in multiplied identity. 
The world seems one huge prison-house & court 
Where men are punished at the slightest cost, 
With lowest rate of colour, warmth & joy. 
What lips my lips have kissed, and where, and why, 
I have forgotten, and what arms have lain 
Under my head till morning; but the rain 
Is full of ghosts tonight, that tap and sigh 
Upon the glass and listen for reply, 
And in my heart there stirs a quiet pain 
For unremembered lads that not again 
Will turn to me at midnight with a cry. 
Thus in the winter stands the lonely tree, 
Nor knows what birds have vanished one by one, 
Yet knows its boughs more silent than before: 
I cannot say what loves have come and gone, 
I only know that summer sang in me 
A little while, that in me sings no more. 
Lady, lovely lady,
    Careless and gay!
 Once when a beggar called
    She gave her child away.
 The beggar took the baby,
    Wrapped it in a shawl,
 “Bring her back,” the lady said,
    “Next time you call.”
 Hard by lived a vain man,
    So vain and so proud,
 He walked on stilts
    To be seen by the crowd.
 Up above the chimney pots,
    Tall as a mast,
 And all the people ran about
    Shouting till he passed.
 “A splendid match surely,”
    Neighbours saw it plain,
 “Although she is so careless,
    Although he is so vain.”
 But the lady played bobcherry,
    Did not see or care,
 As the vain man went by her
    Aloft in the air.
 This gentle-born couple
    Lived and died apart.
 Water will not mix with oil,
    Nor vain with careless heart. 
No, no! Go from me. I have left her lately. 
I will not spoil my sheath with lesser brightness,   
For my surrounding air hath a new lightness; 
Slight are her arms, yet they have bound me straitly   
And left me cloaked as with a gauze of æther;   
As with sweet leaves; as with subtle clearness.   
Oh, I have picked up magic in her nearness 
To sheathe me half in half the things that sheathe her.   
No, no! Go from me. I have still the flavour,   
Soft as spring wind that’s come from birchen bowers.   
Green come the shoots, aye April in the branches, 
As winter’s wound with her sleight hand she staunches,   
Hath of the trees a likeness of the savour: 
As white their bark, so white this lady’s hours. 
In love, his grammar grew 
rich with intensifiers, and adverbs fell
madly from the sky like pheasants 
for the peasantry, and he, as sated
as they were, lolled under shade trees
until roused by moonlight 
and the beautiful fraternal twins 
and and but. Oh that was when
he knew he couldn’t resist
a conjunction of any kind.
One said accumulate, the other
was a doubter who loved the wind
and the mind that cleans up after it.
                                           For love
he wanted to break all the rules, 
light a candle behind a sentence
named Sheila, always running on
and wishing to be stopped
by the hard button of a period. 
Sometimes, in desperation, he’d look
toward a mannequin or a window dresser
with a penchant for parsing.
But mostly he wanted you, Sheila,
and the adjectives that could precede
and change you: bluesy, fly-by-night,
queen of all that is and might be. 
The Devil’s tour of hell did not include   
a factory line where molten lead   
spilled into mouths held wide, 
no electric drill spiraling screws 
into hands and feet, nor giant pliers   
to lower you into simmering vats. 
Instead, a circle of light 
opened on your stuffed armchair, 
whose chintz orchids did not boil and change, 
and the Devil adjusted   
your new spiked antennae 
almost delicately, with claws curled 
and lacquered black, before he spread   
his leather wings to leap   
into the acid-green sky. 
So your head became a tv hull, 
a gargoyle mirror. Your doppelganger   
sloppy at the mouth 
and swollen at the joints   
enacted your days in sinuous   
slow motion, your lines delivered 
with a mocking sneer. Sometimes   
the frame froze, reversed, began   
again: the red eyes of a friend 
you cursed, your girl child cowered   
behind the drapes, parents alive again   
and puzzled by this new form. That’s why 
you clawed your way back to this life. 
Below the gardens and the darkening pines 
The living water sinks among the stones, 
Sinking yet foaming till the snowy tones 
Merge with the fog drawn landward in dim lines. 
The cloud dissolves among the flowering vines, 
And now the definite mountain-side disowns 
The fluid world, the immeasurable zones. 
Then white oblivion swallows all designs. 
But still the rich confusion of the sea, 
Unceasing voice, sombre and solacing, 
Rises through veils of silence past the trees; 
In restless repetition bound, yet free, 
Wave after wave in deluge fresh releasing 
An ancient speech, hushed in tremendous ease. 
Still sits the school-house by the road, 
   A ragged beggar sleeping; 
Around it still the sumachs grow, 
   And blackberry-vines are creeping. 
Within, the master’s desk is seen, 
   Deep scarred by raps official; 
The warping floor, the battered seats, 
   The jack-knife’s carved initial; 
The charcoal frescos on its wall; 
   Its door’s worn sill, betraying 
The feet that, creeping slow to school, 
   Went storming out to playing! 
Long years ago a winter sun 
   Shone over it at setting; 
Lit up its western window-panes, 
   And low eaves’ icy fretting. 
It touched the tangled golden curls, 
   And brown eyes full of grieving, 
Of one who still her steps delayed 
   When all the school were leaving. 
For near her stood the little boy 
   Her childish favor singled: 
His cap pulled low upon a face 
   Where pride and shame were mingled. 
Pushing with restless feet the snow 
   To right and left, he lingered;— 
As restlessly her tiny hands 
   The blue-checked apron fingered. 
He saw her lift her eyes; he felt 
   The soft hand’s light caressing, 
And heard the tremble of her voice, 
   As if a fault confessing. 
“I’m sorry that I spelt the word: 
   I hate to go above you, 
Because,”—the brown eyes lower fell,— 
   “Because, you see, I love you!” 
Still memory to a gray-haired man 
   That sweet child-face is showing. 
Dear girl! the grasses on her grave 
   Have forty years been growing! 
He lives to learn, in life’s hard school, 
   How few who pass above him 
Lament their triumph and his loss, 
   Like her,—because they love him. 
With thick strokes of ink the sky fills with rain.
Pretending to run for cover but secretly praying for more rain.
Over the echo of the water, I hear a voice saying my name.
No one in the city moves under the quick sightless rain.
The pages of my notebook soak, then curl. I’ve written:
“Yogis opened their mouths for hours to drink the rain.”
The sky is a bowl of dark water, rinsing your face.
The window trembles; liquid glass could shatter into rain.
I am a dark bowl, waiting to be filled.
If I open my mouth now, I could drown in the rain.
I hurry home as though someone is there waiting for me.
The night collapses into your skin. I am the rain. 
Not marble nor the gilded monuments 
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme, 
But you shall shine more bright in these contents 
Than unswept stone besmeared with sluttish time. 
When wasteful war shall statues overturn, 
And broils root out the work of masonry, 
Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn 
The living record of your memory. 
’Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity 
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room 
Even in the eyes of all posterity 
That wear this world out to the ending doom. 
    So, till the Judgement that yourself arise, 
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes. 
That everything's inevitable.
That fate is whatever has already happened.
The brain, which is an elemental, as sane, as the rest of the processing universe is.
In this world, I am the surest thing.
Scrunched-up arms, folded legs, lovely destitute eyes.
Please insert your spare coins.
I am filling them up.
Please insert your spare vision, your vigor, your vim.
But yet, I am a vatic one.
As vatic as the Vatican.
In the temper and the tantrum, in the well-kept arboretum
I am waiting, like an animal,
For poetry.
I am learning to abandon the world 
before it can abandon me. 
Already I have given up the moon 
and snow, closing my shades 
against the claims of white. 
And the world has taken 
my father, my friends. 
I have given up melodic lines of hills, 
moving to a flat, tuneless landscape. 
And every night I give my body up 
limb by limb, working upwards 
across bone, towards the heart. 
But morning comes with small 
reprieves of coffee and birdsong. 
A tree outside the window 
which was simply shadow moments ago 
takes back its branches twig 
by leafy twig. 
And as I take my body back 
the sun lays its warm muzzle on my lap 
as if to make amends. 
Travel is a vanishing act
Only to those who are left behind.
What the traveler knows
Is that he accompanies himself,
Unwieldy baggage that can’t be checked, 
Stolen, or lost, or mistaken.
So one took, past outposts of empire,
“Calmly as if in the British Museum,”
Not only her Victorian skirts,
Starched shirtwaists, and umbrella, but her faith 
In the civilizing mission of women,
Her backaches and insomnia, her innocent valor; 
Another, friend of witch-doctors,
Living on native chop,
Trading tobacco and hooks for fish and fetishes, 
Heralded her astonishing arrival
Under shivering stars
By calling, “It’s only me!” A third,
Intent on savage customs, and to demonstrate 
That a woman could travel as easily as a man, 
Carried a handkerchief damp with wifely tears 
And only once permitted a tribal chieftain 
To stroke her long, golden hair.
For DetroitThere are birds here,
so many birds here
is what I was trying to say
when they said those birds were metaphors
for what is trapped
between buildings
and buildings. No.
The birds are here
to root around for bread
the girl’s hands tear
and toss like confetti. No,
I don’t mean the bread is torn like cotton,
I said confetti, and no
not the confetti
a tank can make of a building.
I mean the confetti
a boy can’t stop smiling about
and no his smile isn’t much
like a skeleton at all. And no
his neighborhood is not like a war zone.
I am trying to say
his neighborhood
is as tattered and feathered
as anything else,
as shadow pierced by sun
and light parted
by shadow-dance as anything else,
but they won’t stop saying
how lovely the ruins,
how ruined the lovely
children must be in that birdless city. 
There lies a somnolent lake
Under a noiseless sky,
Where never the mornings break
Nor the evenings die.
Mad flakes of colour 
Whirl on its even face
Iridescent and streaked with pallour;
And, warding the silent place,
The rocks rise sheer and gray
From the sedgeless brink to the sky
Dull-lit with the light of pale half-day
Thro’ a void space and dry.
And the hours lag dead in the air 
With a sense of coming eternity
To the heart of the lonely boatman there:
That boatman am I,
I, in my lonely boat,
A waif on the somnolent lake,
Watching the colours creep and float
With the sinuous track of a snake.
Now I lean o’er the side
And lazy shades in the water see,
Lapped in the sweep of a sluggish tide
Crawled in from the living sea;
And next I fix mine eyes,
So long that the heart declines,
On the changeless face of the open skies
Where no star shines;
And now to the rocks I turn,
To the rocks, around
That lie like walls of a circling sun
Wherein lie bound
The waters that feel my powerless strength
And meet my homeless oar
Labouring over their ashen length
Never to find a shore.
But the gleam still skims
At times on the somnolent lake,
And a light there is that swims
With the whirl of a snake;
And tho’ dead be the hours i’ the air,
And dayless the sky,
The heart is alive of the boatman there:
That boatman am I. 
Announced by all the trumpets of the sky, 
Arrives the snow, and, driving o'er the fields, 
Seems nowhere to alight: the whited air 
Hides hills and woods, the river, and the heaven, 
And veils the farm-house at the garden's end. 
The sled and traveller stopped, the courier's feet 
Delayed, all friends shut out, the housemates sit 
Around the radiant fireplace, enclosed 
In a tumultuous privacy of storm. 
Come see the north wind's masonry. 
Out of an unseen quarry evermore 
Furnished with tile, the fierce artificer 
Curves his white bastions with projected roof 
Round every windward stake, or tree, or door. 
Speeding, the myriad-handed, his wild work 
So fanciful, so savage, nought cares he 
For number or proportion. Mockingly, 
On coop or kennel he hangs Parian wreaths; 
A swan-like form invests the hidden thorn; 
Fills up the farmer's lane from wall to wall, 
Maugre the farmer's sighs; and, at the gate, 
A tapering turret overtops the work. 
And when his hours are numbered, and the world 
Is all his own, retiring, as he were not, 
Leaves, when the sun appears, astonished Art 
To mimic in slow structures, stone by stone, 
Built in an age, the mad wind's night-work, 
The frolic architecture of the snow. 
My own dear love, he is strong and bold 
      And he cares not what comes after. 
His words ring sweet as a chime of gold, 
      And his eyes are lit with laughter. 
He is jubilant as a flag unfurled— 
      Oh, a girl, she’d not forget him. 
My own dear love, he is all my world,— 
      And I wish I’d never met him. 
My love, he’s mad, and my love, he’s fleet, 
      And a wild young wood-thing bore him! 
The ways are fair to his roaming feet, 
      And the skies are sunlit for him. 
As sharply sweet to my heart he seems 
      As the fragrance of acacia. 
My own dear love, he is all my dreams,— 
      And I wish he were in Asia. 
My love runs by like a day in June, 
      And he makes no friends of sorrows. 
He’ll tread his galloping rigadoon 
      In the pathway of the morrows. 
He’ll live his days where the sunbeams start, 
      Nor could storm or wind uproot him. 
My own dear love, he is all my heart,— 
      And I wish somebody’d shoot him. 
Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness, 
   Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun; 
ConspiringConspiring Working together; literally, to conspire is “to breathe together” (OED) with him how to load and bless 
   With fruit the vines that round the thatch-evesthatch-eves Thatch-eaves, the edge of thatched roofs run; 
To bend with apples the moss'd cottage-trees, 
   And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core; 
      To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells 
   With a sweet kernel; to set budding more, 
And still more, later flowers for the bees, 
Until they think warm days will never cease, 
      For summer has o'er-brimm'd their clammy cells. 
Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store? 
   Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find 
Thee sitting careless on a granary floor, 
   Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowingwinnowing Separating the wheat from the chaff, the heavy from the light wind; 
Or on a half-reap'd furrow sound asleep, 
   Drows'd with the fume of poppies, while thy hookhook Scythe 
      Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers: 
And sometimes like a gleanergleaner One who gathers the remaining food after the reaper has harvested the field thou dost keep 
   Steady thy ladenladen Loaded down head across a brook; 
   Or by a cyder-press, with patient look, 
      Thou watchest the last oozings hours by hours. 
Where are the songs of spring? Ay, Where are they?Where are they? Rhetorical convention known as ubi sunt, often appearing in poems that meditate on the transitory nature of life and the inevitability of death. 
   Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,— 
While barred clouds bloombloom “to colour with a soft warm tint or glow” (OED)  the soft-dying day, 
   And touch the stubble-plainsstubble-plains Fields made up of stubble, the remaining stumps of grain left after reaping with rosy hue; 
Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn 
   Among the river sallowssallows Willow trees, borne aloft 
      Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies; 
And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn; 
   Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft 
   The red-breast whistles from a garden-croftgarden-croft A croft is a small enclosed field; 
      And gathering swallows twitter in the skies. 
Pale, then enkindled, 
light 
advancing, 
emblazoning 
summits of palm and pine, 
the dew 
lingering, 
scripture of 
scintillas. 
Soon the roar 
of mowers 
cropping the already short 
grass of lawns, 
men with long-nozzled 
cylinders of pesticide 
poking at weeds, 
at moss in cracks of cement, 
and louder roar 
of helicopters off to spray 
vineyards where braceros try 
to hold their breath, 
and in the distance, bulldozers, excavators, 
babel of destructive construction. 
Banded by deep 
oakshadow, airy 
shadow of eucalyptus, 
miner’s lettuce, 
tender, untasted, 
and other grass, unmown, 
luxuriant, 
no green more brilliant. 
Fragile paradise. 
         .   .   .   . 
At day’s end the whole sky, 
vast, unstinting, flooded with transparent 
mauve, 
tint of wisteria, 
cloudless 
over the malls, the industrial parks, 
the homes with the lights going on, 
the homeless arranging their bundles. 
Who can utter 
the poignance of all that is constantly 
threatened, invaded, expended 
and constantly 
nevertheless 
persists in beauty, 
tranquil as this young moon 
just risen and slowly 
drinking light   
from the vanished sun. 
the praise of such generosity 
or the shame? 
Pity the beautiful,
the dolls, and the dishes, 
the babes with big daddies 
granting their wishes.
Pity the pretty boys, 
the hunks, and Apollos, 
the golden lads whom 
success always follows.
The hotties, the knock-outs,
the tens out of ten, 
the drop-dead gorgeous, 
the great leading men.
Pity the faded, 
the bloated, the blowsy, 
the paunchy Adonis 
whose luck’s gone lousy.
Pity the gods, 
no longer divine.
Pity the night 
the stars lose their shine. 
Two evils, monstrous either one apart, 
Possessed me, and were long and loath at going:   
A cry of Absence, Absence, in the heart,   
And in the wood the furious winter blowing. 
Think not, when fire was bright upon my bricks,   
And past the tight boards hardly a wind could enter,   
I glowed like them, the simple burning sticks,   
Far from my cause, my proper heat and center. 
Better to walk forth in the frozen air 
And wash my wound in the snows; that would be healing;   
Because my heart would throb less painful there,   
Being caked with cold, and past the smart of feeling. 
And where I walked, the murderous winter blast   
Would have this body bowed, these eyeballs streaming,   
And though I think this heart’s blood froze not fast   
It ran too small to spare one drop for dreaming. 
Dear love, these fingers that had known your touch,   
And tied our separate forces first together, 
Were ten poor idiot fingers not worth much,   
Ten frozen parsnips hanging in the weather. 
I said Folk was dressed in Blues but hairier and hemped. 
After "We acoustic banjo disciples!" Jebediah said, "When 
and whereforth shall the bucolic blacks with good tempers 
come to see us pluck as Elizabeth Cotton intended?" 
We stole my Uncle Windchime's minivan, penned a simple   
ballad about the drag of lovelessness and drove the end 
of the chitlin' circuit to a joint skinny as a walk-in temple 
where our new folk was not that new, but strengthened 
by our twelve bar conviction. A month later, in pulled 
a parade of well meaning alabaster post adolescents. 
We noticed the sand-tanned and braless ones piled 
in the ladder-backed front row with their boyfriends 
first because beneath our twangor slept what I'll call 
a hunger for the outlawable. One night J asked me when 
sisters like Chapman would arrive. I shook my chin wool 
then, and placed my hand over the guitar string's wind- 
ow til it stilled. "When the moon's black," I said. "Be faithful." 
My head, my heart, mine Eyes, my life, nay more, 
My joy, my Magazine of earthly store, 
If two be one, as surely thou and I, 
How stayest thou there, whilst I at Ipswich lye? 
So many steps, head from the heart to sever 
If but a neck, soon should we be together: 
I like the earth this season, mourn in black, 
My Sun is gone so far in’s Zodiack, 
Whom whilst I ’joy’d, nor storms, nor frosts I felt, 
His warmth such frigid colds did cause to melt. 
My chilled limbs now nummed lye forlorn; 
Return, return sweet  Sol from Capricorn; 
In this dead time, alas, what can I more 
Then view those fruits which through thy heat I bore? 
Which sweet contentment yield me for a space, 
True living Pictures of their Fathers face. 
O strange effect! now thou art Southward gone, 
I weary grow, the tedious day so long; 
But when thou Northward to me shalt return, 
I wish my Sun may never set, but burn 
Within the Cancer of my glowing breast, 
The welcome house of him my dearest guest. 
Where ever, ever stay, and go not thence, 
Till natures sad decree shall call thee hence; 
Flesh of thy flesh, bone of thy bone, 
I here, thou there, yet both but one. 
Fairy tales are full of impossible tasks:
Gather the chin hairs of a man-eating goat,
Or cross a sulphuric lake in a leaky boat,
Select the prince from a row of identical masks,
Tiptoe up to a dragon where it basks
And snatch its bone; count dust specks, mote by mote,
Or learn the phone directory by rote.
Always it’s impossible what someone asks—
You have to fight magic with magic. You have to believe
That you have something impossible up your sleeve,
The language of snakes, perhaps, an invisible cloak,
An army of ants at your beck, or a lethal joke,
The will to do whatever must be done:
Marry a monster. Hand over your firstborn son.
Though the road turn at last   
to death’s ordinary door,   
and we knock there, ready   
to enter and it opens 
easily for us, 
                     yet 
all the long journey 
we shall have gone in chains,   
fed on knowledge-apples   
acrid and riddled with grubs. 
We taste other food that life,   
like a charitable farm-girl,   
holds out to us as we pass— 
but our mouths are puckered,   
a taint of ash on the tongue. 
It’s not joy that we’ve lost— 
wildfire, it flares 
in dark or shine as it will. 
What’s gone 
is common happiness, 
plain bread we could eat 
with the old apple of knowledge. 
That old one—it griped us sometimes,   
but it was firm, tart,   
sometimes delectable ... 
The ashen apple of these days 
grew from poisoned soil. We are prisoners   
and must eat 
our ration. All the long road 
in chains, even if, after all, 
we come to 
death’s ordinary door, with time 
smiling its ordinary 
long-ago smile. 
Hardly a ghost left to talk with. The slavs moved on 
or changed their names to something green. Greeks gave up   
old dishes and slid into repose. Runs of salmon thin   
and thin until a ripple in October might mean carp. 
Huge mills bang and smoke. Day hangs thick with commerce 
and my favorite home, always overgrown with roses,   
collapsed like moral advice. Tugs still pound against   
the outtide pour but real, running on some definite fuel.   
I can’t dream anything, not some lovely woman   
murdered in a shack, not saw mills going broke, 
not even wild wine and a landslide though I knew both well.   
The blood still begs direction home. This river points   
the way north to the blood, the blue stars certain   
in their swing, their fix. I pass the backwash where   
the cattails still lean north, familiar grebes pop up,   
the windchill is the same. And it comes back with the odor   
of the river, some way I know the lonely sources   
of despair break down from too much love. No matter   
how this water fragments in the reeds, it rejoins   
the river and the bright bay north receives it all,   
new salmon on their way to open ocean,   
the easy tub returned. 
Trying to find my roost   
one lidded, late afternoon,   
the consolation of color   
worked up like neediness,   
like craving chocolate,   
I’m at Art Institute favorites:   
Velasquez’s “Servant,”   
her bashful attention fixed   
to place things just right,   
Beckmann’s “Self-Portrait,”   
whose fishy fingers seem   
never to do a day’s work,   
the great stone lions outside   
monumentally pissed   
by jumbo wreaths and ribbons   
municipal good cheer   
yoked around their heads.   
Mealy mist. Furred air.   
I walk north across   
the river, Christmas lights   
crushed on skyscraper glass,   
bling stringing Michigan Ave.,   
sunlight’s last-gasp sighing   
through the artless fog.   
Vague fatigued promise hangs   
in the low darkened sky   
when bunched scrawny starlings 
rattle up from trees,   
switchback and snag 
like tossed rags dressing   
the bare wintering branches,   
black-on-black shining,   
and I’m in a moment   
more like a fore-moment:   
from the sidewalk, watching them   
poised without purpose,   
I feel lifted inside the common   
hazards and orders of things   
when from their stillness,   
the formal, aimless, not-waiting birds   
erupt again, clap, elated weather- 
making wing-clouds changing,   
smithereened back and forth,   
now already gone to follow   
the river’s running course. 
Rhyme, the rack of finest wits,
That expresseth but by fits
         True conceit,
Spoiling senses of their treasure,
Cozening judgment with a measure,
         But false weight;
Wresting words from their true calling,
Propping verse for fear of falling
         To the ground;
Jointing syllabes, drowning letters,
Fast'ning vowels as with fetters
         They were bound!
Soon as lazy thou wert known,
All good poetry hence was flown,
         And art banish'd.
For a thousand years together
All Parnassus' green did wither,
         And wit vanish'd.
Pegasus did fly away,
At the wells no Muse did stay,
         But bewail'd
So to see the fountain dry,
And Apollo's music die,
         All light failed!
Starveling rhymes did fill the stage;
Not a poet in an age
         Worth crowning;
Not a work deserving bays,
Not a line deserving praise,
         Pallas frowning;
Greek was free from rhyme's infection,
Happy Greek by this protection
         Was not spoiled.
Whilst the Latin, queen of tongues,
Is not yet free from rhyme's wrongs,
         But rests foiled.
Scarce the hill again doth flourish,
Scarce the world a wit doth nourish
         To restore
Phoebus to his crown again,
And the Muses to their brain,
         As before.
Vulgar languages that want
Words and sweetness, and be scant
         Of true measure,
Tyrant rhyme hath so abused,
That they long since have refused
         Other cæsure.
He that first invented thee,
May his joints tormented be,
         Cramp'd forever.
Still may syllabes jar with time,
Still may reason war with rhyme,
         Resting never.
May his sense when it would meet
The cold tumor in his feet,
         Grow unsounder;
And his title be long fool,
That in rearing such a school
            Was the founder.
Leaguered in fire 
The wild black promontories of the coast extend 
Their savage silhouettes; 
The sun in universal carnage sets, 
And, halting higher, 
The motionless storm-clouds mass their sullen threats, 
Like an advancing mob in sword-points penned, 
That, balked, yet stands at bay. 
Mid-zenith hangs the fascinated day 
In wind-lustrated hollows crystalline, 
A wan Valkyrie whose wide pinions shine 
Across the ensanguined ruins of the fray, 
And in her hand swings high o’erhead, 
Above the waster of war, 
The silver torch-light of the evening star 
Wherewith to search the faces of the dead. 
Lagooned in gold, 
Seem not those jetty promontories rather 
The outposts of some ancient land forlorn, 
Uncomforted of morn, 
Where old oblivions gather, 
The melancholy unconsoling fold 
Of all things that go utterly to death 
And mix no more, no more 
With life’s perpetually awakening breath? 
Shall Time not ferry me to such a shore, 
Over such sailless seas, 
To walk with hope’s slain importunities 
In miserable marriage? Nay, shall not 
All things be there forgot, 
Save the sea’s golden barrier and the black 
Close-crouching promontories? 
Dead to all shames, forgotten of all glories, 
Shall I not wander there, a shadow’s shade, 
A spectre self-destroyed, 
So purged of all remembrance and sucked back 
Into the primal void, 
That should we on the shore phantasmal meet 
I should not know the coming of your feet? 
O quam te memorem virgo ... Stand on the highest pavement of the stair— 
Lean on a garden urn— 
Weave, weave the sunlight in your hair— 
Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise— 
Fling them to the ground and turn 
With a fugitive resentment in your eyes: 
But weave, weave the sunlight in your hair. 
So I would have had him leave, 
So I would have had her stand and grieve, 
So he would have left 
As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised, 
As the mind deserts the body it has used. 
I should find 
Some way incomparably light and deft, 
Some way we both should understand, 
Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand. 
She turned away, but with the autumn weather 
Compelled my imagination many days, 
Many days and many hours: 
Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers. 
And I wonder how they should have been together! 
I should have lost a gesture and a pose. 
Sometimes these cogitations still amaze 
The troubled midnight and the noon’s repose. 
Among the signs of autumn I perceive 
The Roman wormwood (called by learned men 
Ambrosia elatior, food for gods,— 
For to impartial science the humblest weed 
Is as immortal once as the proudest flower—) 
Sprinkles its yellow dust over my shoes 
As I cross the now neglected garden. 
—We trample under foot the food of gods 
And spill their nectar in each drop of dew— 
My honest shoes, fast friends that never stray 
Far from my couch, thus powdered, countryfied, 
Bearing many a mile the marks of their adventure, 
At the post-house disgrace the Gallic gloss 
Of those well dressed ones who no morning dew 
Nor Roman wormwood ever have been through, 
Who never walk but are transported rather— 
For what old crime of theirs I do not gather. 
Why am I if I am uncertain reasons may inclose.   
Remain remain propose repose chose.   
I call carelessly that the door is open   
Which if they may refuse to open   
No one can rush to close.   
Let them be mine therefor.   
Everybody knows that I chose.   
Therefor if therefore before I close.   
I will therefore offer therefore I offer this. 
Which if I refuse to miss may be miss is mine. 
I will be well welcome when I come.   
Because I am coming. 
Certainly I come having come. 
                           These stanzas are done. 
(after the Russian)The piano has crawled into the quarry. Hauled   
In last night for firewood, sprawled 
With frozen barrels, crates and sticks, 
The piano is waiting for the axe. 
Legless, a black box, still polished;   
It lies on its belly like a lizard,   
Droning, heaving, hardly fashioned   
For the quarry’s primordial art. 
Blood red: his frozen fingers cleft, 
Two on the right hand, five on the left, 
He goes down on his knees to reach the keyboard,   
To strike the lizard’s chord. 
Seven fingers pick out rhymes and rhythm,   
The frozen skin, steaming, peels off them,   
As from a boiled potato. Their schemes, 
Their beauty, ivory and anthracite, 
Flicker and flash like the great Northern Lights. 
Everything played before is a great lie.   
The reflections of flaming chandeliers— 
Deceit, the white columns, the grand tiers   
In warm concert halls—wild lies. 
But the steel of the piano howls in me,   
I lie in the quarry and I am deft 
As the lizard. I accept the gift. 
I’ll be a song for Russia, I’ll be 
an étude, warmth and bread for everybody. 
The brawling of a sparrow in the eaves,   
The brilliant moon and all the milky sky,   
And all that famous harmony of leaves,   
Had blotted out man's image and his cry. 
A girl arose that had red mournful lips 
And seemed the greatness of the world in tears,   
Doomed like Odysseus and the labouring ships   
And proud as Priam murdered with his peers; 
Arose, and on the instant clamorous eaves,   
A climbing moon upon an empty sky,   
And all that lamentation of the leaves,   
Could but compose man's image and his cry. 
The house is so quiet now 
The vacuum cleaner sulks in the corner closet,   
Its bag limp as a stopped lung, its mouth   
Grinning into the floor, maybe at my 
Slovenly life, my dog-dead youth. 
I’ve lived this way long enough, 
But when my old woman died her soul 
Went into that vacuum cleaner, and I can’t bear   
To see the bag swell like a belly, eating the dust   
And the woolen mice, and begin to howl 
Because there is old filth everywhere 
She used to crawl, in the corner and under the stair.   
I know now how life is cheap as dirt,   
And still the hungry, angry heart   
Hangs on and howls, biting at air. 
I have walked through many lives,
some of them my own,
and I am not who I was,
though some principle of being
abides, from which I struggle
not to stray.
When I look behind,
as I am compelled to look
before I can gather strength
to proceed on my journey,
I see the milestones dwindling
toward the horizon
and the slow fires trailing
from the abandoned camp-sites,
over which scavenger angels
wheel on heavy wings.
Oh, I have made myself a tribe
out of my true affections,
and my tribe is scattered!
How shall the heart be reconciled
to its feast of losses?
In a rising wind
the manic dust of my friends,
those who fell along the way,
bitterly stings my face.
Yet I turn, I turn,
exulting somewhat,
with my will intact to go
wherever I need to go,
and every stone on the road
precious to me.
In my darkest night,
when the moon was covered
and I roamed through wreckage,
a nimbus-clouded voice
directed me:
“Live in the layers,
not on the litter.”
Though I lack the art
to decipher it,
no doubt the next chapter
in my book of transformations
is already written.
I am not done with my changes. 
Play the one about the family of the ducks 
where the ducks go down to the river 
and one of them thinks the water will be cold 
but then they jump in anyway 
and like it and splash around. 
No, I must play the one 
about the nervous man from Palestine in row 14 
with a brown bag in his lap 
in which a gun is hidden in a sandwich. 
Play the one about the handsome man and woman 
standing on the steps of her apartment 
and how the darkness and her perfume and the beating of their hearts 
conjoin to make them feel 
like leaping from the edge of chance— 
No, I should play the one about 
the hard rectangle of the credit card 
hidden in the man’s back pocket 
and how the woman spent an hour 
plucking out her brows, and how her perfume 
was made from the destruction of a hundred flowers. 
Then play the one about the flower industry 
in which the migrant workers curse their own infected hands 
from tossing sheaves of roses and carnations 
into the back of the refrigerated trucks. 
No, I must play the one about the single yellow daffodil 
standing on my kitchen table 
whose cut stem draws the water upwards 
so the plant is flushed with the conviction 
that the water has been sent 
to find and raise it up 
from somewhere so deep inside the earth 
not even flowers can remember. 
I grieve and dare not show my discontent,
I love and yet am forced to seem to hate,
I do, yet dare not say I ever meant,
I seem stark mute but inwardly do prate.
    I am and not, I freeze and yet am burned,
    Since from myself another self I turned.
My care is like my shadow in the sun,
Follows me flying, flies when I pursue it,
Stands and lies by me, doth what I have done.
His too familiar care doth make me rue it.
    No means I find to rid him from my breast,
    Till by the end of things it be supprest.
Some gentler passion slide into my mind,
For I am soft and made of melting snow;
Or be more cruel, love, and so be kind.
Let me or float or sink, be high or low.
    Or let me live with some more sweet content,
    Or die and so forget what love ere meant. 
Since there’s no help, come let us kiss and part. 
Nay, I have done, you get no more of me; 
And I am glad, yea glad with all my heart, 
That thus so cleanly I myself can free. 
Shake hands for ever, cancel all our vows, 
And when we meet at any time again, 
Be it not seen in either of our brows 
That we one jot of former love retain. 
Now at the last gasp of Love’s latest breath, 
When, his pulse failing, Passion speechless lies; 
When Faith is kneeling by his bed of death, 
And Innocence is closing up his eyes— 
Now, if thou wouldst, when all have given him over, 
From death to life thou might’st him yet recover! 
The gravel road rides with a slow gallop   
over the fields, the telephone lines   
streaming behind, its billow of dust   
full of the sparks of redwing blackbirds. 
On either side, those dear old ladies, 
the loosening barns, their little windows   
dulled by cataracts of hay and cobwebs   
hide broken tractors under their skirts. 
So this is Nebraska. A Sunday   
afternoon; July. Driving along 
with your hand out squeezing the air,   
a meadowlark waiting on every post. 
Behind a shelterbelt of cedars, 
top-deep in hollyhocks, pollen and bees,   
a pickup kicks its fenders off 
and settles back to read the clouds. 
You feel like that; you feel like letting   
your tires go flat, like letting the mice   
build a nest in your muffler, like being   
no more than a truck in the weeds, 
clucking with chickens or sticky with honey   
or holding a skinny old man in your lap   
while he watches the road, waiting 
for someone to wave to. You feel like 
waving. You feel like stopping the car 
and dancing around on the road. You wave   
instead and leave your hand out gliding   
larklike over the wheat, over the houses. 
She fears him, and will always ask 
   What fated her to choose him; 
She meets in his engaging mask                   
   All reasons to refuse him; 
But what she meets and what she fears 
Are less than are the downward years, 
Drawn slowly to the foamless weirs 
   Of age, were she to lose him. 
Between a blurred sagacity 
   That once had power to sound him, 
And Love, that will not let him be 
   The Judas that she found him, 
Her pride assuages her almost, 
As if it were alone the cost.— 
He sees that he will not be lost, 
   And waits and looks around him. 
A sense of ocean and old trees 
   Envelops and allures him; 
Tradition, touching all he sees 
   Beguiles and reassures him; 
And all her doubts of what he says 
Are dimmed with what she knows of days— 
Till even prejudice delays 
   And fades, and she secures him. 
The falling leaf inaugurates 
   The reign of her confusion; 
The pounding wave reverberates 
   The dirge of her illusion; 
And home, where passion lived and died, 
Becomes a place where she can hide, 
While all the town and harbor side 
   Vibrate with her seclusion. 
We tell you, tapping on our brows, 
   The story as it should be,— 
As if the story of a house 
   Were told, or ever could be; 
We’ll have no kindly veil between 
Her visions and those we have seen,— 
As if we guessed what hers have been, 
   Or what they are or would be. 
Meanwhile we do no harm; for they 
   That with a god have striven, 
Not hearing much of what we say, 
   Take what the god has given; 
Though like waves breaking it may be, 
Or like a changed familiar tree, 
Or like a stairway to the sea 
   Where down the blind are driven. 
Death, be not proud, though some have called thee 
Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so; 
For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow 
Die not, poor Death, nor yet canst thou kill me. 
From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures be, 
Much pleasure; then from thee much more must flow, 
And soonest our best men with thee do go, 
Rest of their bones, and soul's delivery. 
Thou art slave to fate, chance, kings, and desperate men, 
And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell, 
And poppy or charms can make us sleep as well 
And better than thy stroke; why swell'st thou then? 
One short sleep past, we wake eternally 
And death shall be no more; Death, thou shalt die. 
Lift ev’ry voice and sing,   
Till earth and heaven ring, 
Ring with the harmonies of Liberty; 
Let our rejoicing rise 
High as the list’ning skies, 
Let it resound loud as the rolling sea. 
Sing a song full of the faith that the dark past has taught us, 
Sing a song full of the hope that the present has brought us; 
Facing the rising sun of our new day begun, 
Let us march on till victory is won. 
Stony the road we trod, 
Bitter the chast’ning rod, 
Felt in the days when hope unborn had died;   
Yet with a steady beat, 
Have not our weary feet 
Come to the place for which our fathers sighed? 
We have come over a way that with tears has been watered, 
We have come, treading our path through the blood of the slaughtered, 
Out from the gloomy past,   
Till now we stand at last 
Where the white gleam of our bright star is cast. 
God of our weary years,   
God of our silent tears, 
Thou who has brought us thus far on the way; 
Thou who has by Thy might,   
Led us into the light, 
Keep us forever in the path, we pray. 
Lest our feet stray from the places, our God, where we met Thee, 
Lest our hearts, drunk with the wine of the world, we forget Thee; 
Shadowed beneath Thy hand,   
May we forever stand.   
True to our God, 
True to our native land. 
because it has no pure products 
because the Pacific Ocean sweeps along the coastline 
because the water of the ocean is cold 
and because land is better than ocean 
because I say we rather than they 
because I live in California 
I have eaten fresh artichokes 
and jacaranda bloom in April and May 
because my senses have caught up with my body 
my breath with the air it swallows 
my hunger with my mouth 
because I walk barefoot in my house 
because I have nursed my son at my breast 
because he is a strong American boy 
because I have seen his eyes redden when he is asked who he is 
because he answers I don’t know 
because to have a son is to have a country 
because my son will bury me here 
because countries are in our blood and we bleed them 
because it is late and too late to change my mind 
because it is time. 
They’d been warned 
on every farm 
that playing 
in the silos 
would lead to death. 
You sink in wheat. 
Slowly. And the more 
you struggle the worse it gets. 
‘You’ll see a rat sail past 
your face, nimble on its turf, 
and then you’ll disappear.’ 
In there, hard work 
has no reward. 
So it became a kind of test 
to see how far they could sink 
without needing a rope 
to help them out. 
But in the midst of play 
rituals miss a beat—like both 
leaping in to resolve 
an argument 
as to who’d go first 
and forgetting 
to attach the rope. 
Up to the waist 
and afraid to move. 
That even a call for help 
would see the wheat 
trickle down. 
The painful consolidation 
of time. The grains 
in the hourglass 
grotesquely swollen. 
And that acrid 
chemical smell 
of treated wheat 
coaxing them into 
a near-dead sleep. 
I don’t know what to say to you, neighbor, 
as you shovel snow from your part of our street   
neat in your Greek black. I’ve waited for   
chance to find words; now, by chance, we meet. 
We took our boys to the same kindergarten,   
thirteen years ago when our husbands went. 
Both boys hated school, dropped out feral, dropped in   
to separate troubles. You shift snow fast, back bent,   
but your boy killed himself, six days dead. 
My boy washed your wall when the police were done.   
He says, “We weren’t friends?” and shakes his head,   
“I told him it was great he had that gun,” 
and shakes. I shake, close to you, close to you.   
You have a path to clear, and so you do. 
It is 12:20 in New York a Friday 
three days after Bastille day, yes 
it is 1959 and I go get a shoeshine 
because I will get off the 4:19 in Easthampton   
at 7:15 and then go straight to dinner 
and I don’t know the people who will feed me 
I walk up the muggy street beginning to sun   
and have a hamburger and a malted and buy 
an ugly NEW WORLD WRITING to see what the poets   
in Ghana are doing these days 
                                                        I go on to the bank 
and Miss Stillwagon (first name Linda I once heard)   
doesn’t even look up my balance for once in her life   
and in the GOLDEN GRIFFIN I get a little Verlaine   
for Patsy with drawings by Bonnard although I do   
think of Hesiod, trans. Richmond Lattimore or   
Brendan Behan’s new play or Le Balcon or Les Nègres 
of Genet, but I don’t, I stick with Verlaine 
after practically going to sleep with quandariness 
and for Mike I just stroll into the PARK LANE 
Liquor Store and ask for a bottle of Strega and   
then I go back where I came from to 6th Avenue   
and the tobacconist in the Ziegfeld Theatre and   
casually ask for a carton of Gauloises and a carton 
of Picayunes, and a NEW YORK POST with her face on it 
and I am sweating a lot by now and thinking of 
leaning on the john door in the 5 SPOT 
while she whispered a song along the keyboard 
to Mal Waldron and everyone and I stopped breathing 
“Oh where are you going with your love-locks flowing 
   On the west wind blowing along this valley track?”   
“The downhill path is easy, come with me an it please ye, 
   We shall escape the uphill by never turning back.” 
So they two went together in glowing August weather,   
   The honey-breathing heather lay to their left and right; 
And dear she was to dote on, her swift feet seemed to float on   
   The air like soft twin pigeons too sportive to alight. 
“Oh what is that in heaven where gray cloud-flakes are seven,   
   Where blackest clouds hang riven just at the rainy skirt?”   
“Oh that’s a meteor sent us, a message dumb, portentous,   
   An undeciphered solemn signal of help or hurt.” 
“Oh what is that glides quickly where velvet flowers grow thickly,   
   Their scent comes rich and sickly?”—“A scaled and hooded worm.” 
“Oh what’s that in the hollow, so pale I quake to follow?”   
   “Oh that’s a thin dead body which waits the eternal term.” 
“Turn again, O my sweetest,—turn again, false and fleetest:   
   This beaten way thou beatest I fear is hell’s own track.” 
“Nay, too steep for hill-mounting; nay, too late for cost-counting: 
   This downhill path is easy, but there’s no turning back.” 